Appendix A

Review of Robot
Kinematics and Jacobians
We review here the basic information from a first course in robotics that is
needed for this book. This includes robot kinematics, the arm Jacobian, and
the issue of specifying the Cartesian position. The review is detailed since
those with a background in system theory and controls may not yet have seen
this material. Several examples are given which are used throughout the
book for design and simulation purposes.


A.1 Basic Manipulator Geometries

In this section we look at some basic arm geometries. A robot arm or
manipulator is composed of a set of joints separated in space by the arm
links. The joints are where the motion in the arm occurs (cf. our own wrist
and elbow), while the links are of fixed construction (cf. our own forearm).
Thus the links maintain a fixed relationship between the joints. [Although the
links may be flexible (i.e., they may bend); we ignore flexibility effects here.]
   The joints may be actuated by motors or hydraulic actuators. There are
two sorts of robot joints, involving two sorts of motion. A revolute joint
(denoted R) is one that allows rotary motion about an axis of rotation. An
example is the human elbow. A prismatic joint (denoted P) is one that allows
extension or telescopic motion. An example is a telescoping automobile
antenna. There is no anthropomorphous analogy to the prismatic link. The
joint variables of a manipulator are the variable parameters of the joints. For

                                                                             555
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
556                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians




Figure A.1.1: Basic robot arm geometries: (a) articulated arm, revolute co-ordinates
(RRR); (b) spherical coordinates (RRP); (c) SCARA arm (RRP).




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.1 Basic Manipulator Geometries                                                 557




Figure A.1.1:(Cont.) (d) cylindrical coordinates (RPP); (e) Cartesian arm, rectangular
coordinates (PPP).



a revolute joint the variable is an angle, denoted ␪. For a prismatic joint it is
a length, denoted d.
    Some basic arm geometries are shown in Figure A.1.1. The RRR articulated
arm in Figure A.1.1a is like the human arm, while the PPP Cartesian arm in
Figure A.1.1e is closely tied to the coordinates used in the manipulator
workspace, where the Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z) are often used to describe
tasks to be performed. The workspace is the total volume swept out by the
end effector as the robot executes all possible motions.
    The joint axis of a revolute joint is the axis about which the rotation ␪
occurs. (The sense of rotation is determined using the right-handed screw
rule: If the curled fingers of the right hand indicate the direction of rotation,
the thumb indicates the direction of the axis of rotation.) For a prismatic
joint, it is the axis along which the telescoping action d occurs. The relative
orientations of the joint axes of an arm determine its fundamental properties.
Figure A.1.1c shows a RRP manipulator known as the SCARA (selected
compliant articulated robot for assembly) arm. It has quite a different structure
than the RRP spherical arm shown in Figure A.1.1b, since its joint axes are
all parallel. On the other hand, the joint axes of the spherical arm intersect at
a point.
    Industrial examples of the RRR arm are the PUMA and Cincinnati-Milacron
T3 735 manipulators. The Stanford manipulator is a spherical RRP arm; the
AdeptOne is a SCARA RRP arm. An example of the RPP arm is the GMF M-
100. The Cincinnati-Milacron T3 gantry robot is a PPP arm.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
558                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians

   Many industrial robots are serial link manipulators since they consist of
a series of links connected together by actuated joints. The base is called
link 0, and the last link is terminated by the tool or end effector. Many
robots have six joints, corresponding to the six degrees of freedom needed to
obtain arbitrary position and orientation of the end effector in three-
dimensional space.
   Arms like the PUMA 560 have six revolute joints. In such an arm, the
joints may be grouped into two sets of three joints each. The first three
joints may be used to place the end effector at an arbitrary position within
the three-dimensional workspace. The last three joints may be used to
obtain an arbitrary orientation of the end effector at that position. In the
PUMA 560, the axes of joints 4, 5, and 6 intersect at a common point and
are mutually orthogonal. This makes orienting the end-effector convenient.
The last three joints are known as the wrist mechanism (see Example
A.2.4).




A.2 Robot Kinematics


Here we review the kinematics of robot manipulators, including the arm A
matrices, homogeneous transformations, the T matrix, forward and inverse
kinematics, and joint-space and Cartesian coordinates. Several illustrative
examples are given.


A Matrices

For given values of the joint variables, it is important to be able to specify the
locations of the links with respect to each other. This is accomplished by
using the manipulator kinematic equations.
   We may associate with each link i a coordinate frame (xi, yi, zi) fixed to
that link. See Figure A.2.1. A standard and consistent paradigm for so doing
is the Denavit-Hartenberg (D-H) representation [Paul 1981], [Spong and
Vidyasagar 1989]. The frame attached to link 0 (i.e., the base of the
manipulator) is called the base frame or inertial frame.
   The relation between coordinate frame i-1 and coordinate frame i is given
by the transformation matrix




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.2 Robot Kinematics                                                              559




                                                                               (A.2.1)




Most of the parameters in this A matrix for link i are fixed. The link parameters
are ␣i, the twist of the link i, and ai, the length of link i. These parameters are
tabulated for each link in the arm manufacturer’s specifications. The joint
parameters are the joint angle ␪i and the joint offset di. If joint i is revolute,
the joint variable is ␪i and di is a constant tabulated in the specs. On the other
hand, if the link is prismatic, then di is the joint variable and ␪i is a constant
provided in the specs. The parameter ai for a prismatic joint is defined to be
zero, since the link length is variable and described by di.
   By the D-H convention, for a revolute joint, the rotation ␪i occurs about
axis zi-1. For a prismatic joint di occurs along axis zi-1. Thus the link
coordinate frame is considered to be attached to the outer end of the link.
See the examples.




                    Figure A.2.1: Link kinematic relations in a manipulator.

   The A matrix Ai is a function of only a single variable, namely the joint
variable ␪i or di, since all the other parameters in Ai are fixed for a specific
joint. If a manipulator has n links, the joint-variable vector q is an n-vector
composed of the individual joint variables. Thus q is in general a combination
of angles ␪i and lengths di. For instance, for an RRP arm,




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
560                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians

The components of q are denoted by qi; that is, the general joint variable qi
can represent either an angle ␪i or a length di as appropriate.

Homogeneous Transformations
  The A matrix is a homogeneous transformation matrix of the form


                                                                                (A.2.2)

where Ri is a rotation matrix and pi is a translation vector. Thus if ir is a point
described with respect to the coordinate frame of link i, the same point has
coordinates i-1r with respect to the frame of link i-1 given by

                                                                                (A.2.3)

   The homogeneous transformation is a 4×4 matrix, so that it can describe
both rotations and translations; therefore, the vectors describing position in a
given coordinate frame are 4-vectors. They are of the form



                                                   ,
                                                                                (A.2.4)


where (ix, iy, iz) are the coordinates of the point in frame i. Thus, according to
(A.2.3) and (A.2.2),


                                                                                (A.2.5)

which is just a rotation of Ri applied to the coordinates in frame i plus a
translation of pi.
   We may interpret frame i-1 as the fixed (i.e., “original”) frame and frame
i as the rotated and translated (i.e., “new”) frame due to the following
considerations. According to (A.2.5), there is an easy way to find the rotation
matrix Ri that rotates a given coordinate frame i-1 into another given frame i.
Set pi equal to zero and (ix, iy, iz)=(1,0,0). Then (A.2.5) is equal to the first
column of Ri. That is, the first column of Ri is nothing but the representation
of the new x-axis ix in terms of the original coordinates (i-1x, i-1y, i-1z). Similarly,
the second (respectively third) column of Ri is the representation of the rotated
y-axis iy (respectively, z-axis and iz) in the fixed frame i-1. We shall illustrate
this in Example A.2.1.
   Therefore, Ai may be interpreted from several points of view. It is the
transformation that takes a representation ir of a vector in frame i to its


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.2 Robot Kinematics                                                          561

representation i-1r in frame i-1. On the other hand, it is the description of
frame i in terms of frame i-1; in fact, Ri describes the orientation of the axes of
frame i in terms of frame i-1, while pi describes the origin of frame i in terms
of the coordinates of frame i-1.
   A rotation matrix R enjoys the property of orthogonality, that is, RT=R-1. It
has one eigenvalue at ␭=1, whose eigenvector is the axis of rotation. A rotation
of ␪ about the x axis, for instance, looks like


                                                                           (A.2.6)


   The last entry of “1” in (A.2.4) represents a scaling factor for the length of
the vector. By using a homogeneous transformation whose (4, 4) entry is not
unity, vectors may be scaled. By using entries in positions, (4, 1), (4, 2), (4, 3)
of the transformation matrix, perspective transformations may be performed.
These ideas are important, for instance, in camera-frame transformations but
will not be useful in the transformations associated with the manipulator
arm.

Arm T Matrix
  To obtain the coordinates of a point in terms of the base (i.e., link 0) frame,
we may use the matrices

                                                                           (A.2.7)

Then, given the coordinates ir of a point expressed in the frame attached to
link i, the coordinates of the same point in the base frame are given by

                                                                           (A.2.8)
We call Ti a kinematic chain of transformations.
  We define the arm T matrix as

                                                                           (A.2.9)

with n the number of links in the manipulator. Then, if nr are the coordinates
of a point referred to the last link, the base coordinates of the point are

                                                                          (A.2.10)

This is an important relation since nr, the coordinates of an object in the nth
frame, can represent the location of the object with respect to the tool or end
effector. It is thus important in specifying tasks to be accomplished. On the


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
562                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians

other hand, 0r represents the location of the object with respect to the base
frame, which is the object’s absolute position with respect to the manipulator
base.

Forward Kinematics
  The position and orientation of the end effector with respect to the
manipulator base frame are given by evaluating the arm T matrix. It is
conventional to symbolize this homogeneous transformation as


                                                                            (A.2.11)


Thus the orientations of the axes of the end-effector reference frame are described
with respect to base coordinates by the rotation matrix R=[n o a], and the
origin of the end-effector frame has a position of p in base coordinates.




Figure A.2.2: Robot end effector, showing the definition of (n, o, a, p).


   The 3-vectors n, o, a, and p are defined as in Figure A.2.2. The approach
vector of the end effector is “a”; the orientation vector “o” is the direction
specifying the orientation of the hand, from fingertip to fingertip. The normal
vector “n” is chosen to complete the definition of a right-handed coordinate
system using




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.2 Robot Kinematics                                                              563

Thus (n, o, a) are the base coordinates of an (x, y, z) Cartesian coordinate
system attached to the end effector. The position vector p specifies the location
of the origin of the (n, o, a) frame with respect to the base frame.
   The representation (n, o, a) for the orientation of the end effector is inefficient.
Note that [n o a] is a 3×3 matrix, so that it has nine entries. However, it does
not take nine degrees of freedom to specify orientation. Indeed, [n o a] is a
rotation matrix, so that its columns are orthogonal; this orthogonality
requirement imposes extra constraints on the elements of [n o a], so that the
nine entries of [n o a] are not independent. Alternative more efficient methods
of specifying the orientation of the end effector in base coordinates are the
roll-pitch-yaw, Euler angle, quaternion, and tool-configuration vector
descriptions. We discuss some of these later. The reason we use (n, o, a) is that
the arm T matrix is easily computed using the A matrices in terms of the arm
parameters and join variables. Then n, o, a, and p are simply read off by
examining the T matrix, as we shall see in the examples.
   At this point we should like to distinguish between two sets of coordinates
describing the end effector. The joint variable coordinates of the end effector
are given by the n-vector.



where qi can represent angles or lengths, depending on whether the links are
revolute or prismatic. Generally, n=6, so that the arm has six degrees of
freedom. The end-effector Cartesian coordinates are the description of end
effector orientation and position in terms of the arm base coordinates. According
to (A.2.11), where T may be computed knowing q, the joint variable and
Cartesian coordinates are equivalent, for both specify the location of the end
effector.
   We say that q is the joint-space description of the position and orientation
of the end effector, while (n, o, a, p) is the Cartesian or task space description.
This terminology derives from the fact that descriptions of tasks to be performed
by an arm are generally given in Cartesian coordinates, not in joint coordinates.
   The robot arm kinematics problem is as follows. Given the joint variables
q, find the Cartesian position and orientation of the end of the manipulator.
Thus the kinematics problem amounts to converting given joint variables
into the Cartesian position and orientation of the end effector expressed in
base coordinates. Let us illustrate the solution of this problem for several
simple robot arms which we use as examples throughout the book. It amounts
to computing T.
   It should be mentioned that there are several software packages
commercially available for computing the A matrices and the T matrix for a
given robot arm. See, for instance, [MATMAN 1986].




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
564                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians

EXAMPLE A.2–1: Kinematics for Three-Link Cylindrical Arm
A simple RPP manipulator is shown in Figure A.2.3a. It may be interpreted as
the first three joints of an arm much as the GMF M-100. These are the joints
used to position the end effector. A wrist mechanism consisting of three joints
may be added to the end of the RPP arm to orient the end effector in space (see
Example A.2.4). The joint variables of the three-link arm shown are ␪, h, r,
which correspond to the coordinates of a cylindrical coordinate system, so
that the joint-variable vector is


                                                                               (1)



a. A Matrices
Coordinate frames may be attached to links 1, 2, and 3 using any technique
desired. The D-H frames, to which (A.2.1) corresponds, are shown in Figure
A.2.3b. For this choice of frames, the A matrices may be determined as
follows.
   Frame 1 is related to the base frame 0 by a simple rotation of ␪
degrees about the axis z 0. A z-axis rotation, R z, ␪, with no translation is
described by




                                                                               (2)




where c␪ represents cos ␪ and s␪ represents sin ␪.
    To find A2 we may use (A.2.1). Since link 2 is prismatic with extension h,
the length a2 is zero. In this example the rotation ␪2 is also zero. The twist ␣2
of link 2 is the angle of rotation about axis x2 required to align z1 with z2–that
is, -90°. Therefore,




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.2 Robot Kinematics                                                              565




Figure A.2.3: Three-link cylindrical manipulator: (a) arm schematic; (b) D-H coordinate
frames.




                                                                                   (3)




   There is an attractive alternative to (A.2.1) for determining the link A
matrix in simple cases. Recall that the first column of A2 is the representation
of x2 in the coordinates (x1, y1, z1). According to the figure, this is just [1 0 0]T.
The second column of A2 is the representation of y2 in the coordinates (x1, y1,
z1), which the figure shows is [0 0 -1]T. The third column of A2 is the
representation of 22 in frame o1, which is just [0 1 0]T. Thus (3) is obtained by
inspection.

In similar fashion we obtain,



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
566                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians




                                                                               (4)




b. T Matrix and Arm Kinematics
The arm T matrix is now obtained as




                                                                               (5)




To interpret the T matrix, examine (A.2.11). The position in base coordinates
of the end of the manipulator, that is, the origin of frame 3, is


                                                                               (6)


The orientation of frame 3 described in base coordinates is expressed in (n, o,
a) form by giving the coordinates of the normal, orientation, and approach
vectors in terms of the base frame. These are given by



                                                                               (7)


    A glance at Figure A.2.3b verifies these expressions.
                                                                              䊏




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.2 Robot Kinematics                                                  567

EXAMPLE A.2–2: Kinematics for Two-Link Planar Elbow Arm
A two-link planar RR arm is shown in Figure A.2.4a where a1 and a2 are the
fixed and known link length parameters. The link coordinate frames are
shown in Figure A.2.4b. We have taken the z-axes perpendicular to the page
to conform to the convention of specifying points in a plane by (x, y)
coordinates. Therefore, the frames are not defined quite as in the D-H
convention.
   The arm A matrices may be written by inspection as




                                                                       (1)




where c1, s1, represent respectively cos ␪1, sin ␪1 and




                                                                       (2)




The arm T matrix is given by




                                                                       (3)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
568                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians




Figure A.2.4: Two-link planar RR arm: (a) arm schematic; (b) D-H coordinate
frames.



where
   Therefore, the origin o2 of frame 2 in terms of base coordinates is located
at


                                                                               (4)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.2 Robot Kinematics                                                        569

This represents the kinematic solution, which converts the joint variable
coordinates (␪1, ␪2) into the base-frame Cartesian coordinates of the end of the
arm. The reader should examine Figure A.2.4a to verify this expression.
                                                                           䊏


EXAMPLE A.2–3: Kinematics for Two-Link Polar Arm
A two-link planar RP arm is shown in Figure A.2.5a where ᐉ is the fixed
known length of the base link. The link frames, with the z-axes perpendicular
to the page, are shown in Figure A.2.5b. The joint vector is


                                                                             (1)


which corresponds to polar coordinates in the plane.




Figure A.2.5: Two-link planar RP arm: (a) arm schematic; (b) D-H coordinate
frames.

    By inspection, the A matrices are found to be



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
570                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians




                                                                               (2)




                                                                               (3)




The T matrix is




                                                                               (4)




    Therefore, the base coordinates of the end of the arm are

                                                                               (5)

which should be verified by examining Figure A.2.5a. This may be interpreted
as the forward kinematics solution for the arm.
   This example illustrates the freedom we have to select the base frame
origin o0. We could have selected o0 coincident with o1. However, we have
chosen to include the length ᐉ of link 0 by placing o0 at the bottom of the base
link.
                                                                            䊏



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.2 Robot Kinematics                                                          571



EXAMPLE A.2–4: Kinematics for Spherical Wrist




                                          Figure A.2.6: Spherical wrist.



A spherical wrist mechanism is shown in Figure A.2.6. See [Paul 1981], [Spong
and Vidyasagar 1989]. For convenient orientational control, all three joint
axes intersect at a common point. Since many six-link industrial arms, including
the Stanford arm, end in such a configuration, we have labeled the three joint
variables ␪4, ␪5, ␪6. The D-H frames are also shown in the figure. Recall that
the rotation ␪i occurs about axis zi-1 in the D-H convention. The origin of
frame 6 has been chosen at the base of the fingered gripper. The length d6 is a
fixed known parameter.


By expressing the axes x4, y4, z4 in terms of the coordinates (x3, y3, z3), we are
able to directly determine the columns of A4 to obtain



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
572                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians




                                                                                 (1)




    Determining x5, y5, z5 in terms of (x4, y4, z4) yields




                                                                                 (2)




In writing down A5, it is important to note that ␪5 is defined to be zero when
the end effector is in an upright position, that is, when the arm is fully extended.
We have drawn the figure with ␪5=-90° to show more clearly the different
coordinate systems.
   In similar fashion, we obtain




                                                                                 (3)




The wrist T matrix is


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.2 Robot Kinematics                                                        573




                                                                             (4)




where c4≡cos ␪4, and so on. It is quite interesting to note that the rotational
part of this T matrix corresponds to the Euler angle transformation [Spong
and Vidyasagar 1989]. Therefore, ␪4, ␪5, ␪6 may be interpreted as the Euler
angles with respect to frame 3.
   Suppose that we would like to determine the kinematic transformations of
the 3-link cylindrical arm in Example A.2.1 terminated with a spherical wrist.
Then it is only necessary to multiply the T matrix in Example A.2.1 and (4),
in that order, to obtain the overall manipulator T matrix.
                                                                           䊏

Inverse Kinematics
   The location of the end effector is specified in base coordinates by the arm
T matrix. On the other hand, the location of the end effector is specified in
joint coordinates by giving the values of the joint variables qi. We may compute
the T matrix knowing the joint-variable vector q, as in the examples just
shown. Finding T from q is the kinematics problem.
   The inverse-kinematics problem is as follows. Given (n, o, a, p) for the
end effector in base coordinates, determine the joint variables qi in the T
matrix


                                                                       (A.2.12)


that yield the specified (n, o, a, p). This problem is important in manipulator
control, for the desired Cartesian orientation and position of the end effector
are specified by the task. Then the solution to the inverse kinematics
problems gives the joint variables qi required to achieve that orientation
and position.
   Due to the functions involved in the T matrix, the relations between qi
and (n, o, a, p) are highly nonlinear; these must be inverted to obtain the


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
574                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians

inverse kinematic solution q. The solutions for qi are generally not unique.
If the last three arm axes intersect at a point (e.g., the wrist mechanism in
Example A.2.4), it is common to split the inverse kinematics problem into
two parts. In a six-link arm, for instance, one first determines q1, q2, and q3
required to obtain the desired Cartesian position p. Then the wrist variables
q4, q5, and q6 that give the desired orientation (n, o, a) are determined. Some
techniques for solving the inverse kinematics problem are given in [Paul
1981], [Craig 1989], [Spong and Vidyasagar 1989]. An example is now
given.


EXAMPLE A.2–5: Inverse Kinematics for Two-Link Planar Elbow Arm

For the planar RR arm of Example A.2.2, the inverse kinematics problem
amounts to finding the joint variable ␪1 and ␪2 given a desired Cartesian
position (x, y) of the end of the arm. See Figure A.2.7.
   The first thing that is evident is that, as long as                       ,
there are two solutions. The one shown in Figure A.2.7 is the “elbow down”
solution. Another solution may be determined for the “elbow
up“configuration, where both links are above the vector [x y]T. Thus the
inverse kinematics problem generally has a nonunique solution. This may
often be taken advantage of to obtain end-effector positioning with collision
avoidance.
   Given the T matrix from Example A.2.2, we see that ␪1 and ␪2 may be
found by solving


                                                                               (1)



                                                                               (2)


Determining ␪1 and ␪2 based on algebraic manipulations of such equations is
called the algebraic inverse kinematics solution technique [Paul 1981]. Let us
show a geometric technique here.
   Referring to Figure A.2.7, define

                                                                               (3)


and use the law of cosines to obtain




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.2 Robot Kinematics                                                           575




                Figure A.2.7: Inverse kinematics for two-link planar RR arm.




                                                                               (4)

We could now solve for ␪2 using the cos-1 function. However, it is better to use
tan-1 for reasons of numerical accuracy. The FORTRAN function implementing
tan-1(b/c) is ATAN2(b, c). This function has a uniform accuracy over the
range of its arguments, returns a unique value for the angle depending on the
signs of b and c, and gives the correct solution if b and/or c is zero.
   Therefore, we proceed by computing


                                                                               (5)


                                                                               (6)


                                                                               (7)

An additional advantage of using the arctangent is that the multiple solutions
of the inverse kinematics problem are explicitly revealed by the choice of
negative or positive sign in (6).



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
576                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians

   To determine ␪1 define the auxiliary angle ␸ in the figure. By inspection of
the right triangle shown,

                                                                                 (8)

Moreover,

                                                                                 (9)

so that

                                                                              (10)

Note that ␪1 depends on ␪2.
                                                                             䊏


A.3 The Manipulator Jacobian

Given a generally nonlinear transformation from the joint variable q(t)僆Rn
to         ,

                                                                           (A.3.1)

we define the Jacobian associated with h(q) as


                                                                           (A.3.2)

   As we have just seen, the Jacobian is useful in feedback linearization, and
therefore in robot manipulator control. It is also the means by which we
transform velocity, acceleration, and force between coordinate frames.

Transformation of Velocity and Acceleration
  Since

                                                                           (A.3.3)

the Jacobian allows us to transform velocity from joint space to “y-space.”
Let us discuss the special case where y(t) is the Cartesian velocity. Then J(q) is
called the manipulator Jacobian.
   It is usual to define the generalized Cartesian velocity as


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.3 The Manipulator Jacobian                                                 577



                                                                         (A.3.4)


with v=[vx vy vz]T the linear velocity and ␻=[␻x ␻y ␻z]T the angular velocity.
For instance, ␻x represents angular velocity about the x-axis. Thus y has six
components and the arm Jacobian J is a 6×n matrix, with n the number of
joints in the manipulator. If n=6, the Jacobian is square. We shall soon show
how to compute the manipulator Jacobian.
    Using (A.3.3), we can obtain an expression for the transformation of
differential motion. Let dq=[dq1…dqn]T be a differential motion in joint space,
with dqi a small rotation if joint i is revolute, and a small linear displacement
if joint i is prismatic. Let




                                                                         (A.3.5)



describe the same differential motion in Cartesian coordinates, with [dx dy
dz]T the differential linear motion and [␦x ␦y ␦z]T representing the differential
rotation. Here ␦x, for instance, means a small rotation about the x-axis. We
have written the Cartesian differential motion vector dy in boldface to
distinguish it from the small change dy in the second coordinate of Cartesian
position.
   According to (A.3.3), where                              , we see that

                                                                         (A.3.6)

with J the Jacobian relating joint space and Cartesian space.
  The transformation of acceleration is found by differentiating (A.3.3) to be

                                                                         (A.3.7)


Transformation of Force
   To discover the transformation of static force between coordinate frames,
consider the following.
   The virtual work resulting from the application of a generalized force/
torque in joint space that results in a differential motion dq is

                                                                         (A.3.8)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
578                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians

with ␶ the n-vector of arm control torques/forces, and dq=[dq1…dqn]T the
differential change in the joint variable. If the description in another coordinate
frame of the force is F and the description there of position is y, we must also
have

                                                                            (A.3.9)

Now taking (A.3.6) into account, we may write



so that the transformation from force to torque is given by

                                                                           (A.3.10)

In the case that y(t) is Cartesian position, we define the Cartesian generalized
force to be the 6-vector

                                                                           (A.3.11)

with fc=[fx fy fz]T a Cartesian force 3-vector, and ␶c=[␶ x ␶y ␶z]T a 3-vector
representing Cartesian torques. For instance, ␶x represents torque exerted about
the x-axis.
   If the arm has six links and the Jacobian is nonsingular, the transformation
from generalized torque to generalized force is given by

                                                                           (A.3.12)

The singularities in the Jacobian generally occur at the extremities of the
manipulator workspace.

Specification of Cartesian Position
   It is now necessary to confront an issue that is a source of confusion in
robotics. Consider Equation (A.3.2). Unfortunately, when discussing the
transformation h(q) from joint space to Cartesian space, this equation may only
be interpreted as a convenience of notation, not as a rigorous mathematical
formula. The reason is that although the generalized Cartesian velocity (A.3.4)
and acceleration, and the generalized Cartesian force (A.3.11) are bona fide 6-
vectors, there is a problem with conveniently specifying the generalized Cartesian
position y(t). We now discuss several ways to specify the Cartesian position.

Representing Generalized Cartesian Position as (n, o, a, p). In our context,
both the location of the origin of the end-effector frame as well as its orientation


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.3 The Manipulator Jacobian                                                  579

must be specified in base coordinates. It is easy to specify the origin of the
end-effector frame in base coordinates (x, y, z) using a 3-vector p(t)=[px py pz]T.
However, specification of orientation is not so easy. This is because it takes
more than three independent variables to specify uniquely the orientation of
one frame with respect to another.
   It should be mentioned that conventions such as the Euler angles and roll-
pitch-yaw [Paul 1981], [Spong and Vidyasagar 1989] involve only three
variables. However, they may not be used to uniquely specify the absolute
orientation of one frame with respect to another, but only relative changes in
orientation. We have already seen in (A.3.5) that only three variables are
needed to describe differential rotations.
   In our work we have specified the Cartesian position y(t) of the end effector
in base coordinates by using the (n, o, a, p) approach (see Section A.2). There
we define the generalized Cartesian position as


                                                                          (A 3.13)


with T(t) the arm T matrix, (n, o, a) the vectors needed to describe the end-
effector orientation, and p=[px py pz]T the positional portion of the Cartesian
description that specifies the origin of the end-effector frame.
   It is clear that the selection of the transformation h(q) depends on how we
wish to describe the Cartesian position y(t). If we use (A.3.13), then h(q) is just
the arm kinematics transformation discussed in Section A.2. However, then
y(t) is not a 6-vector but a 4×4 matrix. Therefore, the definition of the arm
Jacobian as J(q)=∂h/∂q is a loose one purely for notational convenience.
Therefore, we are faced with the problem of providing a suitable definition
for J(q). Before we do this, let us discuss some more techniques for representing
the generalized Cartesian position.

Representing Cartesian Orientation Using Euler’s Theorem. The positional
portion of y is easy to specify; it is just the 3-vector p= [px py pz]T found from
the last column of the T matrix in (A.3.13). However, since [n o a] is a
rotation matrix having nine elements, it does not afford an efficient
representation of orientation. The orthogonality of the rotation matrix imposes
some constraints among its elements, meaning that it actually has only four
degrees of freedom.
   The orientation of one coordinate frame (frame 1) with respect to another
(frame 0) may be specified uniquely using a 3-vector k representing the axis
of rotation of frame 1 with respect to frame 0, and an angle ϕ specifying the
amount of rotation about that axis. We call (k, ␸) the Euler rotation parameters.
The (k, ␸) convention involves four variables, which may be found as follows.
Suppose that the rotation matrix


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
580                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians



                                                                          (A.3.14)

describes the orientation of frame 1 with respect to frame 0. Note that R is the
upper left 3×3 submatrix of the arm T matrix, so that it may be computed
given the joint vector q.
   A rotation matrix is orthogonal, so that it has one eigenvalue equal to 1.
Then the axis of rotation k is the eigenvector of the eigenvalue. That is,

                                                                          (A.3.15)


This is known as Euler’s theorem. It says that Rk=k, or that the rotation axis
is not rotated by R. There are many good routines for computing eigenvectors
(e.g., [IMSL]), which may be used to find k from R. See the problems to find
an explicit formula for k in terms of (n, o, a) [Paul 1981].
    The angle of rotation ␸ about the axis k may easily be found, for the trace
of a rotation matrix is equal to 1+2 cos ␸. Therefore,


                                                                          (A.3.16)


where nx, for instance, denotes the x component of the normal vector n.
   Using Euler’s rotation parameters we may specify the generalized Cartesian
position as a 7-vector, with three components for position (i.e., the last column
p of the T matrix) and four components (i.e., k and ␸) for orientation.

Representing Cartesian Orientation Using Quaternions. The quaternion
representation is a 4-vector which is often used to describe the end-effector
frame orientation [Ickes 1970], [Sheppard 1978], [Yuan 1988], [Stevens and
Lewis 1992].
   The quaternions are four numbers represented as (q0, q), with q=[q1 q2 q3]T
a 3-vector. They are given in terms of the Euler parameters (k, ␸) by



                                                                          (A.3.17)


Using quaternions, the generalized Cartesian position may be represented as
the 7-vector y=[px py pz q0 q1 q2 q3 ] T . An advantage of this representation is
that no angles are involved.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.3 The Manipulator Jacobian                                                  581


    Tool-Configuration Vector. A technique for specifying y(t) as a 6-vector is
given in [Schilling 1990]. It depends on adopting a convention for encoding
orientational information.
    Consider the arm T matrix in (A.3.13) whose rotational portion is R in
(A.3.14). Let us select the 3-vector p to represent Cartesian linear position.
The approach vector a is a 3-vector specifying the direction in which the end
effector points in terms of base coordinates. Recall from the discussion on
kinematics in Section A.2 that this vector specifies in base coordinates the
axis zn of the frame attached to the end of link n. Since the rotation matrix R
is orthogonal, the approach vector has a length of one.
    The two vectors p and a almost completely specify the Cartesian position
of the end effector. The only piece of information missing is the roll angle of
the end effector. However, this angle is nothing by qn=␪n, the last joint variable
of the manipulator.
    To capture the information qn, let us propose scaling the approach vector
by the exponential function eqn/␲ to define the tool-configuration vector as



                                                                         (A.3.18)

This is a 6-vector, which uniquely specifies the Cartesian position of the end
effector in base coordinates.
   Note that there is a unique mapping between w and (p, a, qn), since, given
w and the fact that ||a||=1, we may compute


                                                                         (A.3.19)



                                                                         (A.3.20)


with wi the ith component of w.

Finding Cartesian Velocity from the Arm T Matrix. Note that using the
definition (A.3.4), the Cartesian velocity y is a 6-vector that is not strictly
speaking the derivative of y(t) in (A.3.13), which is a 4×4 matrix. To compute
y, we may find the Jacobian J(q) and then use (A.3.3). Alternatively, the
Cartesian velocity may be found directly from the arm T matrix (A.2.11) as
follows.
    Setting                with v the linear velocity and ␻ the angular velocity,
it is clear that


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
582                                            Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians



                                                                                  (A.3.21)

with p found from the last column of T.
  To find ␻, proceed as follows. Since R in (A.2.11) is orthogonal, we have

                                                                                  (A.3.22)

which on differentiation yields



Therefore, the matrix defined as

                                                                                  (A.3.23)

satisfies                        , so it is skew symmetric. It may therefore be represented
as


                                                                                  (A.3.24)


   The relation between the cross-product matrix ⍀ and the angular velocity
vector


                                                                                  (A.3.25)


is an interesting one, for one may easily demonstrate that

                                                                                  (A.3.26)

for any 3-vector w. That is, the cross product may be replaced by a matrix
multiplication in terms of the cross-product matrix. We denote by ⍀(w) the
cross-product matrix associated with a vector ␻.
   The complete procedure for determining y from the T matrix is then as
follows. First, compute v using the p vector as in (A.3.21). Then, compute
⍀(w) from the rotation matrix R using (A.3.23), and hence find the last three
components ␻ of y from the definition of ⍀(w). Computing y from q thus
requires a computer subroutine. Robot controllers generally have block
diagrams in which some of the blocks are standard components like integrators,
but some of the blocks are implemented in software.
   Using (A.3.23), we may write the strapdown equation


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.3 The Manipulator Jacobian                                                   583



                                                                           (A.3.27)

which is of fundamental importance in inertial navigation [Stevens and Lewis
1992].

Computing the Arm Jacobian
   Let us now return to the problem of defining and computing the arm Jacobian
J(q). If the Cartesian position is defined by (A.3.13), then (A.3.2) does not
afford an appropriate definition. Therefore, let us select (A.3.3) as the definition
of J(q). That is, define J(q) by

                                                                           (A.3.28)

so that it maps the joint velocity q to the Cartesian velocity y as defined by
(A.3.4). Then J(q) is a 6×n matrix.
   Let us consider a few examples showing how to compute the arm Jacobian
to demonstrate that the procedure is not complicated. A methodical technique
for computing J(q) will then be given.

EXAMPLE A.3–1: Arm Jacobian for Three-Link Cylindrical Arm

Let us use the kinematics derived in Example A.2.1 to compute the Jacobian
for the three-link cylindrical arm. We shall call the joint variables (␪, z, r)
instead of (␪, h, r) to avoid confusion with the nonlinear function h(q).
    Since there is no wrist on this three-link arm, the orientation of the last
coordinate frame is fixed in terms of (␪, z, r), so that is not necessary to
specify Cartesian orientation. This simplifies things for this example.
    Denote the linear Cartesian position of the end effector in base co-ordinates
(i.e., the first three components of y) as yp. Then, according to Example A.2.1,
yp is the last column of the arm T matrix, so that



                                                                                 (1)


Omitting the orientational information has allowed us to define a (positional)
transformation function hp(q) simply as the last column p of the T matrix.
   Using (A.3.2) and the definition of hp(q) given in (1), the Jacobian is




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
584                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians




                                                                               (2)


Therefore, the velocities of the joints are converted into Cartesian velocities
using



                                                                               (3)


The determinant of J is (r cos2 ␪+r sin2 ␪)=r, so that J is nonsingular as long as
r⬆0.
   Note that the definition (1) of the positional function hp(q) means that the
Jacobian is equal to ∂hp/∂q. This is a result of neglecting the orientation
portion of y.
                                                                             䊏

EXAMPLE A.3–2: Arm Jacobian for Two-Link Planar Elbow Arm
In Example A.2.2 the joint variable was q=[␪1 ␪2]T. As in Example A.3.1, the
orientation of the last coordinate frame is fixed once q is given, so that we are
not concerned with the orientational portion of y, but only its linear position
portion yp.
   The linear Cartesian position of the end effector in the (x1, x2)-plane is
given by the last column of the arm T matrix as


                                                                               (1)


Since the motion is constrained to the plane, we have suppressed the x3
component of yp.
   The Jacobian is


                                                                               (2)


Note that the definition of hp(q) in (1) means that the Jacobian is equal to
∂hp/∂q.



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.3 The Manipulator Jacobian                                                 585

  The determinant of J is (verify!) equal to a1a2 sin␪2, so that J is nonsingular
unless ␪2=0 or ␲; that is, unless the arm is fully extended or link 2 is folded
back on top of link 1.
                                                                            䊏

EXAMPLE A.3–3: Jacobian for Transformation to Camera Co-ordinates
Consider the three-link cylindrical arm of Examples A.2.1 and A.3.1 with a
camera mounted vertically above the arm that measures only the position (x1,
x2) of the end effector in the horizontal plane (in base coordinates). Call this
position y. Then, according to those examples, the transformation from joint
coordinates (␪, z, r) to camera coordinates (x1, x2) is


                                                                              (1)


and the associated Jacobian is


                                                                              (2)


   The determinant of J with the second column deleted is equal to -r, so that
J has full row rank as long as r⬆0. The pseudo-inverse of J is



                                                                              (3)


   Since the camera cannot measure the distance x3 perpendicular to the plane,
that coordinate must be selected in any control scheme using an independent
means that does not involve trajectory following control in the horizontal
plane.
                                                                         䊏

Algorithm for Computing the Arm Jacobian. We are finally in a position to
show how to compute the arm Jacobian given the joint variables qi. The
procedure follows.
  Given qi, compute the matrices Ti defined in Section A.2 as


                                                                        (A.3.29)

whose corresponding rotation matrices will be denoted


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
586                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians


                                                                           (A.3.30)

Define To=I, Ro=I, and the arm T matrix


                                                                           (A.3.31)

   The vector zi represents the z-axis of frame i in base coordinates. The
vector p represents the location of the origin of link frame n (the end-effector
frame) in terms of base coordinates. The Jacobian is computed using the
vectors p and zi as follows.
   The generalized Cartesian velocity is                   . Therefore, we may
partition the Jacobian matrix into a linear and an orientational part by
writing

                                                                           (A.3.32)

with Jp(q) the first three rows of J(q) and Jo(q) its last three rows.
   First, consider the computation of the linear position Jacobian Jp(q). Given
that the linear portion of the generalized Cartesian position y is just p, we
may write


                                                                           (A.3.33)

Therefore, Jp(q) is given by

                                                                           (A.3.34)

It should be clearly understood that this is exactly what we used in Examples
A.3.1 and A.3.2.
    Let us now turn to the orientational portion Jo(q) of the Jacobian. Exactly
as for linear velocities, one may add angular velocities as long as they are
represented in the same coordinate frame. Let us therefore add the individual
angular velocities of the links in the arm to obtain the angular velocity of the
end effector. A prismatic joint does not contribute to the angular velocity of
the end effector.
    For a revolute joint, the joint rotation qi=␪i occurs about joint axis zi-1 (see
Section A.2, especially Figure A.2.1). The angular velocity for joint variable
i is therefore given by        . To add the effects of all the links, it is necessary
to express zi-1 in a common frame; we select base coordinates. However, the
last column of Ri-1 is exactly zi-1 in base coordinates. Therefore, we may write



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
A.3 The Manipulator Jacobian                                                 587




                                                                        (A.3.35)


where z0=[0 0 1]T and the selection parameter ␬i is zero if qi is prismatic and 1
if qi is revolute. Thus


                                                                        (A.3.36)


   The complete Jacobian is now given by stacking Ji(q) on top of Jo(q). It
should now be clear that the arm Jacobian must be found from the joint
vector q using a significant amount of computation. Therefore, whenever the
Jacobian is required in a robot arm control scheme, it should be computed
using a computer subroutine.
   It is a good exercise to rework Examples A.3.1 and A.3.2 to determine the
complete Jacobian, including the angular portion (see the problems).


EXAMPLE A.3–4: Jacobian for Spherical Wrist
In Example A.2.4 we derived the kinematics for a spherical wrist. Although
the wrist would normally terminate an arm, for illustration let us take link 3
as the base link in this example. See Figure A.2.6. Thus we shall determine
the Jacobian in the coordinates of the link 3 frame of reference.
   To find the Jacobian, we compute the matrices




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
588                                       Review of Robot Kinematics and Jacobians




Using the approach just derived, we compute directly that




                                                                             䊏




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES

[Craig 1989] Craig, J.J., Introduction to Robotics. Reading, MA: Addison-
    Wesley, 1989.
[Ickes 1970] Ickes, B.P., “A new method for performing digital control system
    altitude computations using quaternions,” AIAA J., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 13–
    17, Jan. 1970.
[IMSL] IMSL, Library Contents Document, 8th ed. Houston, TX: International
   Mathematical and Statistical Libraries.
[MATMAN 1986] MATMAN, Symbolic Matrix Manipulation, M.R.Driels,
   Pembroke, MA: Kern International, 1986.
[Paul 1981] Paul, R.P., Robot Manipulators, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
    1981.
[Schilling 1990] Schilling, R.J., Fundamentals of Robotics, Englewood Cliffs,
    NJ: Prentice Hall, 1990.
[Sheppard 1978] Sheppard, S.W., “Quaternion from rotation matrix,” Eng.
    Notes, pp. 223–224, May/June 1978.
[Spong and Vidyasagar 1989] Spong, M.W., and M.Vidyasagar, Robot
    Dynamics and Control. New York: Wiley, 1989.
[Stevens and Lewis 1992] Stevens, B.L., and F.L.Lewis, Aircraft Modeling,
    Dynamics, and Control. New York: Wiley, 1992.
[Yuan 1988] Yuan, J.S.-C., “Closed-loop manipulator control using quaternion
    feedback,” IEEE J. Robot. Autom., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 434–440, Aug.
    1988.




                                                                         589
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
