Chapter 4

Computed-Torque Control
In this chapter we examine some straightforward control schemes for robot
manipulators that fall under the class known as “computed-torque controllers.”
These generally perform well when the robot arm parameters are known
fairly accurately. Some connections are given with classical robot control,
and modern design techniques are provided as well. The effects of digital
implementation of robot controllers are shown. Trajectory generation is
outlined.


4.1 Introduction

A basic problem in controlling robots is to make the manipulator follow a
preplanned desired trajectory. Before the robot can do any useful work, we
must position it in the right place at the right instances. In this chapter we
discuss computed-torque control, which yields a family of easy-to-understand
control schemes that often work well in practice. These schemes involve the
decomposition of the controls design problem into an inner-loop design and
an outer-loop design.
    In Section 4.4 we provide connections with classical manipulator control
schemes based on independent joint design using PID control. In Section 4.6
we show how to use some modern design techniques in conjunction with
computed-torque control. Thus this chapter could be considered as a bridge
between classical design techniques of the sort used several years ago in robot
control, and the modern design techniques in the remainder of the book which
are needed to obtain high performance in uncertain environments.
    We assume here the robot is moving in free space, having no contact with
its environment. Contact results in the generation of forces. The force control

                                                                           169
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
170                                                 Computed-Torque Control

problem is dealt with in Chapter 7. We will also assume in this chapter that
the robot is a well-known rigid system, thus designing controllers based on a
fairly well-known model. Control in the presence of uncertainties or unknown
parameters (e.g., friction, payload mass) requires refined approaches. This
problem is dealt with using robust control in Chapter 4 and adaptive control
in Chapter 5.
    An actual robot manipulator may have flexibility in its links, or compliance
in its gearing (joint flexibility). In Chapter 6 we cover some aspects of control
with joint flexibility.
    Before we can control a robot arm, it is necessary to know the desired path
for performing a task. There are many issues associated with the path planning
problem, such as avoiding obstacles and making sure that the planned path
does not require exceeding the voltage and torque limitations of the actuators.
To reduce the control problem to its basic components, in this chapter we
assume that the ultimate control objective is to move the robot along a
prescribed desired trajectory. We do not concern ourselves with the actual
trajectory-planning problem; we do, however, show how to reconstruct a
continuous desired path from a given table of desired points the end effector
should pass through. This continuous-path generation problem is covered in
Section 4.2.
    In most practical situations robot controllers are implemented on
microprocessors, particularly in view of the complex nature of modern control
schemes. Therefore, in Section 4.5 we illustrate some notions of the digital
implementation of robot controllers.
    Throughout, we demonstrate how to simulate robot controllers on a
computer. This should be done to verify the effectiveness of any proposed
control scheme prior to actual implementation on a real robot manipulator.


4.2 Path Generation

Throughout the book we assume that there is given a prescribed path qd(t) the
robot arm should follow. We design control schemes that make the manipulator
follow this desired path or trajectory. Trajectory planning involves finding
the prescribed path and is usually considered a separate design problem
involving collision avoidance, concerns about actuator saturation, and so on.
See [Lee et al. 1983].
   We do not cover trajectory planning. However, we do cover two aspects of
trajectory generation. First, we show how to convert a given prescribed path
from Cartesian space to joint space. Then, given a table of desired points the
end effector should pass through, we show how to reconstruct a continuous
desired trajectory.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.2 Path Generation                                                           171

Converting Cartesian Trajectories to Joint Space
In robotic applications, a desired task is usually specified in the workspace or
Cartesian space, as this is where the motion of the manipulator is easily
described in relation to the external environment and workpiece. However,
trajectory-following control is easily performed in the joint space, as this is
where the arm dynamics are more easily formulated.
   Therefore, it is important to be able to find the desired joint space trajectory
qd(t) given the desired Cartesian trajectory. This is accomplished using the
inverse kinematics, as shown in the next example. The example illustrates
that the mapping of Cartesian to joint space trajectories may not be unique-
that is, several joint space trajectories may yield the same Cartesian trajectory
for the end-effector.

EXAMPLE 4.2–1: Mapping a Prescribed Cartesian Trajectory to Joint
Space
In Example A.3–5 are derived the inverse kinematics for the two-link planar
robot arm shown in Figure 4.2.1. Let us use them to convert a path from
Cartesian space to joint space.
   Suppose that we want the two-link arm to follow a given workspace or
Cartesian trajectory

                                           p(t)=(x(t), y(t))                    (1)

in the (x, y) plane which is a function of time t. Since the arm is moved by
actuators that control its angles 1, 2, it is convenient to convert the specified
Cartesian trajectory (x(t), y(t)) into a joint space trajectory (1(t), 2(t)) for
control purposes.
   This may be achieved by using the inverse kinematics transformations

                                              r2=x2+y2                          (2)



                                                                                (3)



                                                                                (4)



                                          2=ATAN2 (D, C)                       (5)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
172                                                      Computed-Torque Control

                       1=ATAN2(y, x)-ATAN2 (a2 sin 2, a1+a2 cos 2)        (6)




Figure 4.2.1: Two-link planar elbow arm.




Figure 4.2.2: Desired Cartesian trajectory.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.2 Path Generation                                                           173

  Suppose that the end of the arm should repeatedly trace out the circular
workspace path p(t) shown in Figure 4.2.2, which is described by

                                          x(t)=2+½cos t
                                          y(t)=1+½sin t.                        (7)

   By using these expressions for each time t in the inverse kinematics equations,
we obtain the required joint-space trajectories q(t)=(1(t), 2(t)) given in Figure
4.2.3 that yield the circular Cartesian motion of the end effector (using a1=2,
a2=2).
   We have computed the joint variables for the “elbow down” configuration.
Selecting the opposite sign in (4) gives the “elbow up” joint space trajectory
yielding the same Cartesian trajectory.
                                                                                 䊏
Polynomial Path Interpolation
Suppose that a desired trajectory for the manipulator motion has been
determined, either in Cartesian space or, using the inverse kinematics, in joint
space. For convenience, we use the joint space variable q(t) for notation. It is
not possible to store the entire trajectory in computer memory, and few
practically useful trajectories have a simple closed-form expression. Therefore,
it is usual to store in computer memory a sequence of points qi(tk) for each
joint variable i that represent the desired values of that variable at the discrete
times tk. Thus q(tk) is a point in Rn that the joint variables should pass through
at time tk.We call these via points.
    Most robot control schemes require a continuous desired trajectory. To
convert the table of via points qi(tk) to a continuous desired trajectory qd(t), we
may use many options. Let us discuss here polynomial interpolation.
    Suppose that the via points are uniformly spaced in time and define the
sampling period as

                                            T=tk+1-tk.                     (4.2.1)

For smooth motion, on each time interval [tk, tk+1] we require the desired
                             .
position qd(t) and velocity qd(t) to match the tabulated via points. This yields
boundary conditions of




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
174                                                  Computed-Torque Control




Figure 4.2.3: Required joint-space trajectories: (a) 1 (deg); (b) 2 (deg).




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.2 Path Generation                                                           175




                                                                          (4.2.2)



To match these boundary conditions, it is necessary to use on [tk, tk+1] the
cubic interpolating polynomial

                                                                          (4.2.3)


which has four free variables. Then

                                                                          (4.2.4)


                                                                          (4.2.5)

so that the acceleration is linear on each sample period.
  It is easy to solve for the coefficients that guarantee matching of the boundary
conditions. In fact, we see that




                                                                          (4.2.6)


This is solved to obtain the required interpolating coefficients on each interval
[tk, tk+1].




                                                                          (4.2.7)




Note that this technique requires storing the desired position and velocity at
each sampling point in tabular form. A variant uses a higher-order polynomial
to ensure continuous position, velocity, and acceleration at each sample
time tk.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
176                                                  Computed-Torque Control

  Although we have used the joint variable notation q(t), it should be
emphasized that trajectory interpolation can also be performed in Cartesian
space.

Linear Function with Parabolic Blends
Using cubic interpolating polynomials, the acceleration on each sample
period is linear. However, in many practical applications there are good
reasons for insisting on constant accelerations within each sample period.
For instance, any real robot has upper limits on the torques that can be
supplied by its actuators. For linear systems (think of Newton’s law) this
translates into constant accelerations. Therefore, constant accelerations are
less likely to saturate the actuators. Besides that, most industrial robot
controllers are programmed to use constant accelerations on each sample
period.
    A constant acceleration profile is shown in Figure 4.2.4(a). The associated
velocity and position profiles are shown in Figure 4.2.4(b) and 4.2.4(c). The
position trajectory has three parts: a quadratic or parabolic initial portion,
a linear midsection, and a parabolic final portion. Therefore, let us discuss
interpolation of via points using linear functions with parabolic blends (LFPB).
    The time at which the position trajectory switches from parabolic to
linear is known as the blend time tb. A position qdi(t) should be specified for
each joint variable i. The trajectory in Figure 4.2.4(c) can be written for
joint i as




                                                                          (4.2.8)

The coefficient vi may be interpreted as the maximum velocity allowed for
joint variable i. The design parameters are vi and tb.
    It is straightforward to solve for the coefficients on each time interval [tk,
tk+1] that ensure satisfaction of the boundary conditions (4.2.2). The result is




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.2 Path Generation                                                 177




Figure 4.2.4: LFPB trajectory: (a) acceleration; (b) velocity.




                                                                 (4.2.9)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
178                                                                 Computed-Torque Control




                                      Figure 4.2.4: (Cont.)(c) position.

Minimum-Time Trajectories
There is an important special class of LFPB trajectories. Suppose the
acceleration is limited by a maximum value of aM and it is desired for the
robot arm to get from one position to another in minimum time. For simplicity
assume that the initial and final velocities are equal to zero. The general case
is covered in [Lewis 1986a] (see the Problems).
    A minimum-time trajectory is shown in Figure 4.2.5. To drive joint variable
i from a rest position of q0=qi(t0) to a desired final rest position of qf=qi(tf) in a
minimum time tf, the maximum acceleration aM should be applied until the
switching time ts, after which time the maximum deceleration -aM should be
applied until tf. Note that both ts and tf depend on q0 and qf. We may write




Then the velocity equations yield




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.2 Path Generation                                                          179




Figure 4.2.5: Minimum-time trajectory: (a) acceleration; (b) velocity.


or

                                          ts=(tf+t0)/2.                  (4.2.10)

That is, the switching from maximum acceleration to maximum deceleration
occurs at the half-time point. Now simple manipulations on the position
equations yield



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
180                                                                 Computed-Torque Control




                                      Figure 4.2.5: (Cont.)(c) position.




whence (4.2.10) yields

                                                                                    (4.2.11)


A closed-loop formulation of minimum-time control appears in [Lewis 1986a].
   Unfortunately, minimum-time trajectories computed using a constant
maximum acceleration are not directly relevant in robotics. This is due to the
fact that an actual manipulator has a torque limit of τm. Since the robot
equation (see Table 3.3.1) is nonlinear, this does not correlate to a constant
upper bound on the acceleration. For instance, a robot arm has different
maximum accelerations in its fully extended and fully retracted positions. For
more discussion see [Kahn and Roth 1971], [Chen 1989], [Geering 1986],
[Gourdeau and Schwartz 1989], [Jayasuriya and Suh 1985], [Kahn and Roth
1971], [Kim and Shin 1985], [Shin and McKay 1985].



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.3 Computer Simulation of Robotic Systems                                    181


4.3 Computer Simulation of Robotic Systems

It is very important to simulate on a digital computer a proposed manipulator
control scheme before actually implementing it on an arm. We show here
how to perform such computer simulations for robotic systems. Since most
robot controllers are actually implemented in a digital fashion (Section 4.5),
we also show how to simulate digital robot arm controllers.

Simulation of Robot Dynamics
There is a variety of software packages for the simulation of nonlinear
dynamical systems, including SIMNON [Åström and Wittenmark 1984],
MATLAB, and others. For convenience, we include in Appendix B some
simulation programs that are quite useful for continuous and digital control.
   All simulation programs require the user to write similar subroutines. Time
response simulators that use integration routines such as Runge-Kutta all require
the computation of the state derivative given the current state. In Section 3.4
we saw how to represent the robot arm equation

                                                                           (4.3.1)

in the nonlinear state-space form

                                                                           (4.3.2)

with x(t) the state and u(t) the input.
                               .
  Defining a state as x=[qT qT]T, we may write the implicit form


                                                                           (4.3.3)


with τ the arm control torque that is provided by the controller and τd the
disturbance torque. We say that this is an implicit form since the coefficient
matrix of the left-hand side means that                                is not given
explicitly in terms of the right-hand side.
   Given x(t), it is necessary to provide a subroutine for the integration program
that computes (t). One approach to solving for is to invert M(q). However,
due to potential numerical problems this is not recommended. Let us represent
(4.3.3) as
                                                                           (4.3.4)

Note that in this case u(t) is the vector composed of the controls (t) and the
disturbances d(t).


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
182                                                                     Computed-Torque Control

   A simple time response program, TRESP, is given in Appendix B. Given a
subroutine F(time, x, ) that computes given x(t) and u(t) using (4.3.4); it
uses a Runge-Kutta integrator to compute the state trajectory x(t). To solve
                                                                           .
for within subroutine F(t, x, )we recommend computing M(q) and N(q, q)
and, then solving

                                                                                         (4.3.5)


[i.e., the bottom portion of (4.3.3)] by least-squares techniques, which are
more stable numerically than the inversion of M(q). Least-squares equation
solvers are readily available commercially in, for instance [IMSL], [LINPACK],
and elsewhere. For simpler arms, M(q) may be inverted analytically.
    Throughout the book we illustrate the simulation of the arm dynamics
using various control schemes.

Simulation of Digital Robot Controllers
While most robot controllers are designed in continuous time, they are
implemented on actual robots digitally. That is, the control signals are only
updated at discrete instants of time using a microprocessor. We discuss the
implementation of digital robot arm controllers in Section 4.5. To verify that
a proposed controller will operate as expected, therefore, it is highly desirable
to simulate it in its digitized or discretized form prior to actual implementation.




                                          Figure 4.3.1: Digital controller.


   A digital control scheme is shown in Figure 4.3.1. The plant or system to
be controlled is a continuous-time system, and K(z) is the dynamic digital
controller, where z is the Z-transform variable (i.e., z-1 represents a unit time
delay). The digital controller K(z) is implemented using software code in a
digital signal processor (DSP). The reference input r(t) is the desired trajectory
that y(t) should follow, and ek is the (discrete) tracking error.
   The sampler with sample period T is an analog-to-digital (A/D) converter
that takes the samples yk=y(kT) of the output y(t) that are required by the
software controller K(z). The definition of y(t) can vary depending on the



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.3 Computer Simulation of Robotic Systems                                     183

control scheme. For instance, in robot control, y(t) might represent the 2n—
vector composed of q(t) and q.(t).




Figure 4.3.2: Data reconstruction using a ZOH: (a) discrete control sequence uk; (b)
reconstructed continuous signal u(t).


   The hold device in the figure is a digital-to-analog (D/A) converter that
converts the discrete control samples uk computed by the software controller
K(z) into the continuous-time control u(t) required by the plant. It is a data
reconstruction device. The input uk and output u(t) for a zero-order hold (ZOH)
are shown in Figure 4.3.2. Note that u(kT)=uk, with T the sample period, so
that u(t) is continuous from the right. That is, u(t) is updated at times kT. The
ZOH is generally used for controls purposes, as opposed to other higher-order
devices such as the first-order hold, since most commercially available DSPs
have a built-in ZOH.
   Once a controller has been designed, it is important to simulate it using a
digital computer before it is implemented to determine if the closed-loop
response is suitable. This is especially true in robotics, since the digital



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
184                                                            Computed-Torque Control

controller is generally found by designing a continuous-time controller, which
is then digitized using approximation techniques such as Euler’s method. That
is, for nonlinear systems, the controller discretization schemes are generally
not exact. This results in degraded performance. To verify that the controller
performance will be suitable, the simulation should provide the response at
all times, including times between the samples.
    To simulate a digital controller we may use the scheme shown in Figure
4.3.3. There, the continuous plant dynamics are contained in the subroutine
F(t, x, ); they are integrated using a Runge-Kutta integrator. The figure
assumes a ZOH; thus the control input u(t) is updated to uk at each time kT,
and then held constant until time (k+1)T Note that two time intervals are
involved; the sampling period T and the Runge-Kutta integration period
TR <<T. TR should be selected as an integral divisor of T.




                           Figure 4.3.3: Digital control simulation scheme.

    This simulation technique provides the plant state x(t) as a continuous
function of time, even at values between the sampling instants [in fact, it
provides x(t) at multiples of TR]. This is essential in verifying acceptable
intersample behavior of the closed-loop system prior to implementing the
digital controller on the actual plant.
    Program TRESP in Appendix B can be used to implement Figure 4.3.3.
It is written in a modular fashion to apply to a wide variety of situations.
We shall illustrate its use for the purpose of digital control in several



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                 185

subsequent examples. The use of such simulation software as SIMNON is
quite similar.
   We discuss the implementation of digital robot arm controllers in Section
4.5. Some detailed discussion on digital control, simulation, and DSP
implementation of controllers is given in [Lewis 1992].


4.4 Computed-Torque Control

Through the years there have been proposed many sorts of robot control
schemes. As it happens, most of them can be considered as special cases of the
class of computed-torque controllers. Computed torque, at the same time, is a
special application of feedback linearization of nonlinear systems, which has
gained popularity in modern systems theory [Hunt et al. 1983], [Gilbert and
Ha 1984]. In fact, one way to classify robot control schemes is to divide them
as “computed-torque-like” or “noncomputed-torque-like.” Computed-torque-
like controls appear in robust control, adaptive control, learning control, and
so on.
   In the remainder of this chapter we explore this class of robot controllers,
which includes such a broad range of designs. Computed-torque control allows
us to conveniently derive very effective robot controllers, while providing a
framework to bring together classical independent joint control and some
modern design techniques, as well as set the stage for the rest of the book. A
summary of the different computed-torque-like controllers is given at the end
of the section in Table 4.4.1. We shall see that many digital robot controllers
are also computed-torque-like controllers (Section 4.5).

Derivation of Inner Feedforward Loop
The robot arm dynamics are

                                                                         (4.4.1)

or

                                                                         (4.4.2)

with the joint variable                      the control torque, and d(t) a
disturbance. If this equation includes motor actuator dynamics (Section 3.6),
then (t) is an input voltage.
   Suppose that a desired trajectory qd(t) has been selected for the arm motion,
according to the discussion in Section 4.2. To ensure trajectory tracking by
the joint variable, define an output or tracking error as



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
186                                                             Computed-Torque Control

                                                                                     (4.4.3)

To demonstrate the influence of the input               (t)on the tracking error, differe-
ntiate twice to obtain



Solving now for                    in (4.4.2) and substituting into the last equation yields

                                                                                     (4.4.4)

Defining the control input function

                                                                                     (4.4.5)

and the disturbance function

                                                                                     (4.4.6)

we may define a state                          by


                                                                                     (4.4.7)


and write the tracking error dynamics as


                                                                                     (4.4.8)


This is a linear error system in Brunovsky canonical form consisting of n
pairs of double integrators 1/s2, one per joint. It is driven by the control input
u(t) and the disturbance w(t). Note that this derivation is a special case of the
general feedback linearization procedure in Section 3.4.
   The feedback linearizing transformation (4.4.5) may be inverted to yield

                                                                                     (4.4.9)

We call this the computed-torque control law. The importance of these
manipulations is as follows. There has been no state-space transformation in
going from (4.4.1) to (4.4.8). Therefore, if we select a control u(t) that stabilizes
(4.4.8) so that e(t) goes to zero, then the nonlinear control input given by
(t)(4.4.9) will cause trajectory following in the robot arm (4.4.1). In fact,
substituting (4.4.9) into (4.4.2) yields


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                   187




or

                                                                         (4.4.10)

which is exactly (4.4.8).




Figure 4.4.1: Computed-torque control scheme, showing inner and outer loops.




   The stabilization of (4.4.8) is not difficult. In fact, the nonlinear
transformation (4.4.5) has converted a complicated nonlinear controls design
problem into a simple design problem for a linear system consisting of n
decoupled subsystems, each obeying Newton’s laws.
   The resulting control scheme appears in Figure 4.4.1. It is important to
note that it consists of an inner nonlinear loop plus an outer control signal
u(t). We shall see several ways for selecting u(t). Since u(t) will depend on q(t)
      .
and q(t), the outer loop will be a feedback loop. In general, we may select a
dynamic compensator H(s) so that

                                          U(s)=H(s)E(s).                 (4.4.11)

H(s) can be selected for good closed-loop behavior. According to (4.4.10), the
closed-loop error system then has transfer function

                                          T(s)=s2I-H(s).                 (4.4.12)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
188                                                 Computed-Torque Control

   It is important to realize that computed-torque depends on the inversion of
the robot dynamics, and indeed is sometimes called inverse dynamics control
In fact, (4.4.9) shows that (t) is computed by substituting d–u for in (4.4.2);
that is, by solving the robot inverse dynamics problem. The caveats associated
with system inversion, including the problems resulting when the system has
non-minimum-phase zeros, all apply here. (Note that in the linear case, the
system zeros are the poles of the inverse. Such nonminimum-phase notions
generalize to nonlinear systems.) Fortunately for us, the rigid arm dynamics
are minimum phase.
   There are several ways to compute (4.4.9) for implementation purposes.
Formal matrix multiplication at each sample time should be avoided. In some
cases the expression may be worked out analytically. A good way to compute
the torque (t) is to use the efficient Newton-Euler inverse dynamics formulation
[Craig 1985] with d–u in place of (t).
   The outer-loop signal u(t) can be chosen using many approaches, including
robust and adaptive control techniques. In the remainder of this chapter we
explore some choices for u(t) and some variations on computed-torque control.

PD Outer-Loop Design
One way to select the auxiliary control signal u(t) is as the proportional-plus-
derivative (PD) feedback,

                                                                        (4.4.13)

Then the overall robot arm input becomes

                                                                        (4.4.14)

This controller is shown in Figure 4.4.6 with Ki=0. The closed-loop error
dynamics are
                                                                        (4.4.15)
or in state-space form,

                                                                        (4.4.16)

The closed-loop characteristic polynomial is

                                                                        (4.4.17)

   Choice of PD Gains. It is usual to take the n×n gain matrices diagonal so
that



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                 189

                                                                       (4.4.18)

Then

                                                                       (4.4.19)

and the error system is asymptotically stable as long as the Kvi and Kpi are
all positive. Therefore, as long as the disturbance w(t) is bounded, so is the
error e(t). In connection with this, examine (4.4.6) and recall from Table
3.3.1 that M-1 is upper bounded. Thus boundedness of w(t) is equivalent to
boundedness of d(t).
   It is important to note that although selecting the PD gain matrices diagonal
results in decoupled control at the outer-loop level, it does not result in a
decoupled joint-control strategy. This is because multiplication by M(q) and
                                                     .
addition of the nonlinear feedforward terms N (q, q) in the inner loop scrambles
the signal u(t) among all the joints. Thus, information on all joint positions
                     .
q(t) and velocities q(t) is generally needed to compute the control (t) for any
one given joint.
   The standard form for the second-order characteristic polynomial is

                                                                       (4.4.20)

with  the damping ratio and n the natural frequency. Therefore, desired
performance in each component of the error e(t) may be achieved by selecting
the PD gains as

                                                                       (4.4.21)

with , n the desired damping ratio and natural frequency for joint error i. It
may be useful to select the desired responses at the end of the arm faster than
near the base, where the masses that must be moved are heavier.
  It is undesirable for the robot to exhibit overshoot, since this could cause
impact if, for instance, a desired trajectory terminates at the surface of a
workpiece. Therefore, the PD gains are usually selected for critical damping
=1. In this case

                                                                       (4.4.22)


   Selection of the Natural Frequency. The natural frequency n governs the
speed of response in each error component. It should be large for fast responses
and is selected depending on the performance objectives. Thus the desired
trajectories should be taken into account in selecting n. We discuss now
some additional factors in this choice.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
190                                               Computed-Torque Control

   There are some upper limits on the choice for n [Paul 1981]. Although the
links of most industrial robots are massive, they may have some flexibility.
Suppose that the frequency of the first flexible or resonant mode of link i is
                                                                      (4.4.23)
with J the link inertia and kr the link stiffness. Then, to avoid exciting the
resonant mode, we should select n<r/2. Of course, the link inertia J changes
with the arm configuration, so that its maximum value might be used in
computing r.
   Another upper bound on n is provided by considerations on actuator
saturation. If the PD gains are too large, the torque τ(t) may reach its upper
limits.
   Some more feeling for the choice of the PD gains is provided from error-
boundedness considerations as follows. The transfer function of the closed-
loop error system in (4.4.15) is

                                                                      (4.4.24)

or if Kv and Kp are diagonal,

                                                                      (4.4.25)


                                                                      (4.4.26)

    We assume that the disturbance and M-1 are bounded (Table 3.3.1), so that

                                                                      (4.4.27)
         —          —
with m and d known for a given robot arm. Therefore,

                                                                      (4.4.28)


                                                                      (4.4.29)

   Now selecting the L2—norm, the operator gain ||H(s)||2 is the maximum
value of the Bode magnitude plot of H(s). For a critically damped system,

                                                                      (4.4.30)

Therefore,



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                 191

                                                                       (4.4.31)

Moreover (see the Problems),

                                                                       (4.4.32)

so that

                                                                       (4.4.33)

Thus, in the case of critical damping, the position error decreases with kpi and
the velocity error decreases with kvi.

EXAMPLE 4.4–1: Simulation of PD Computed-Torque Control
    In this example we intend to show the detailed mechanics of simulating a
    PD computed-torque controller on a digital computer.


    a. Computed-Torque Control Law
    In Example 3.2.2 we found the dynamics of the two-link planar elbow arm
    shown in Figure 4.2.1 to be




                                                                             (1)
    These are in the standard form

                                                                             (2)

    Take the link masses as 1 kg and their lengths as 1 m.
      The PD computed-torque control law is given as



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
192                                                            Computed-Torque Control

                                                                                   (3)

with the tracking error defined as

                                               e=qd-q.                             (4)



b. Desired Trajectory
Let the desired trajectory qd(t) have the components


                                          θ1d=g1 sin (2πt/T)
                                          θ2d=g2 cos (2πt/T)                       (5)


with period T=2 s and amplitudes gi=0.1 rad≈6 deg. For good tracking select
the time constant of the closed-loop system as 0.1 s. For critical damping, this
means that Kv=diag{kv}, KP=diag{kp}, where



                                                                                   (6)



It is important to realize that the selection of controller parameters such as the
PD gains depends on the performance objectives-in this case, the period of the
desired trajectory.


c. Computer Simulation
Let us simulate the computed-torque controller using program TRESP in
Appendix B. Simulation using commercial packages such as MATLAB and
SIMNON is quite similar.
   The subroutines needed for TRESP are shown in Figure 4.4.2. They are
worth examining closely. Subroutine SYSINP (ITx, t) is called once per Runge-
Kutta integration period and generates the reference trajectory qd(t), as well
as qd(t), and qd(t). Note that the reference signal should be held constant
during each integration period.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control               193




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
194                                       Computed-Torque Control




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                     195




Figure 4.4.2: Subroutines for simulation using TRESP.




                            Figure 4.4.3: Joint angles θ1(t) and θ2(t) (red).


  Subroutine F(time, x, xp) is called by Runge-Kutta and contains the
continuous dynamics. This includes both the controller and the arm dynamics.
The state to be integrated is                           and the subroutine should
compute the state derivative x (i.e., xp, which signifies x—prime).
  Subroutine CTL(x) contains the controller (3). Note the structure of this
subroutine. First, the tracking error e(t) and its derivative are computed. Then
M(q) and                                    are computed. Finally, (3) is
manufactured.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
196                                                               Computed-Torque Control




                             Figure 4.4.4: Tracking error e1(t), e2(t) (red).



   Subroutine ARM(x, xp) contains the robot dynamics. First, M(q) and M-
1
 (q) are computed, and then N(q,q). The state derivatives are then determined.
   The results of the simulation are shown in the figures. Figure 4.4.3 shows
the joint angles. Figure 4.4.4 shows the joint errors. The initial conditions
result in a large initial error that vanishes within 0.6 s. Figure 4.4.5 shows the
control torques; the larger torque corresponds to the inner motor, which must
move two links.
   It is interesting to note the ripples in e(t) that appear in Figure 4.4.4. These
are artifacts of the integrator. The Runge-Kutta integration period was TR=0.01
s. When the simulation was repeated using TR=0.001 s, the tracking error was
exactly zero after 0.6 s. It should be zero, since computed-torque, or inverse
dynamics control, is a scheme for canceling the nonlinearities in the dynamics
to yield a second-order linear error system. If all the arm parameters are
exactly known, this cancellation is exact. It is a good exercise to repeat this
simulation using various values for the PD gains (see the Problems).




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                  197




                                    Figure 4.4.5: Torque inputs (N-m).


                                                                              䊏
PID Outer-Loop Design
We have just seen that PD computed-torque control is very effective if all the
arm parameters are known and there is no disturbance d. However, from
classical control theory we know that in the presence of constant disturbances,
PD control gives a nonzero steady-state error. Consequently, we are motivated
to make the system type I by including an integrator in the feedforward loop-
this can be achieved using the PID computed-torque controller

                                                                         (4.4.34)


                                                                         (4.4.35)

which yields the arm control input

                                                                         (4.4.36)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
198                                                                  Computed-Torque Control




                           Figure 4.4.6: PID computed-torque controller.



with e(t) the integral of the tracking error e(t). Thus additional dynamics have
been added to the linear outer-loop compensator.
   This control law is conveniently described by defining the state as
x=                          and augmenting the error dynamics (4.4.8) with an
integrator, so that



                                                                                     (4.4.37)



A block diagram of the PID computed-torque controller appears in Figure
4.4.6. Then the closed-loop system is



                                                                                     (4.4.38)



The closed-loop characteristic polynomial is

                                          ∆c(s)=|s3I+Kvs2+Kps+Ki|.                   (4.4.39)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                  199

Selecting diagonal control’ gains

                                                                        (4.4.40)

gives


                                                                        (4.4.41)


By using the Routh test it can be found that for closed-loop stability we require
that

                                                                        (4.4.42)

that is, the integral gain should not be too large.

Actuator Saturation and Integrator Windup. It is important to be aware of an
effect in implementing PID control on any actual robot manipulator that can
cause serious problems if not accounted for. Any real robot arm will have
limits on the voltages and torques of its actuators. These limits may or may
not cause a problem with PD control, but are virtually guaranteed to cause
problems with integral control due to a phenomenon known as integrator
windup [Lewis 1992].
    Consider the simple case where =kiε with ε(t) the integrator output. The
torque input (t) is limited by its maximum and minimum values max and min.
If kiε(t) hits max, there may or not may not be a problem. The problem arises
if the integrator input remains positive, for then the integrator continues to
integrate upwards and kiε(t) may increase well beyond max. Then, when the
integrator input becomes negative, it may take considerable time for kiε(t) to
decrease below max. In the meantime  is held at max, giving an incorrect
control input to the plant.
    Integrator windup is easy to correct using antiwindup protection in a digital
controller. This is discussed in Section 4.5. The effects of uncorrected windup
are demonstrated in Example 4.4.4.
    The next example shows the usefulness of an integral term when there are
unknown disturbances present.

EXAMPLE 4.4–2: Simulation of PID Computed-Torque Control
    In Example 4.4.1 we simulated the PD computed-torque controller for a
    two-link planar arm. In this example we add a constant unknown




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
200                                                   Computed-Torque Control




Figure 4.4.7: Computed-torque controller tracking errors e1(t), e2(t) (red): (a) PD
control; (b) PID control.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                  201




Figure 4.4.8: Computed-torque controller torque inputs (N-m): (a) PD control; (b)
PID control.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
202                                                     Computed-Torque Control

    disturbance to the arm dynamics and compare PD to PID computed
    torque.
    Thus let the arm dynamics be

                                                                             (1)

    with d a constant disturbance with 1 N-m in each component. This could
    model unknown dynamics such as friction, and so on. The value of 1 N-m
    represents quite a large bias.
       Adding 1 to the computation of the nonlinear terms N1 and N2 in
    subroutine arm(x, xp) in Figure 4.4.2 and using the PD computed-torque
    controller with kp=100, kv=20 yields the error plot in Figure 4.4.7(a).
    There is a unacceptable residual bias in the tracking error due to the
    unmodeled constant disturbance, which is not accounted for in the
    computed-torque law. The largest error is 0.033 rad, somewhat less
    than 2 deg.
       Adding now an integral-error weighting term with ki=500 yields the
    results in Figure 4.4.7(b), which show a zero steady-state error and are
    quite good.
       The associated control torques are shown in Figure 4.4.8, which shows
    that the torque magnitudes are not appreciably increased by using the
    integral term.
       To simulate the PID control law, it is necessary to add two additional
    states to x in subroutine arm(x, xp). It is convenient to call them x(5) and
    x(6), so that the lines added to the subroutine are


                                          xp(5)=e(1).
                                          xp(6)=e(2).                        (2)

    Thus it is now necessary to compute e(1) and e(2) in subroutine arm(x, xp)
    for integration purposes.
                                                                            䊏

Class of Computed-Torque-Like Controllers
An entire class of computed-torque-like controllers can be obtained by
modifying the computed-torque control law to read

                                                                        (4.4.43)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                    203

The carets denote design choices for the weighting and offset matrices. One
choice is =M(q), =N(q,q). The calculated control input into the robot arm
is c(t).
    In some cases M(q) is not known exactly (e.g., unknown payload mass), or
N(q, ) is not known exactly (e.g., unknown friction terms). Then             and
could be the best estimate we have for these terms. On the other hand, we
might simply wish to avoid computing M(q) and N(q,q) at each sample time,
or the sample period might be too short to allow this with the available
hardware. From such considerations, we call (4.4.43) an “approximate
computed-torque” controller.
    In Table 4.4.1 are given some useful computed-torque-like controllers. As it
turns out, computed torque is quite a good scheme since it has some important
robustness properties. In fact, even if ≠M and ≠N the performance of
controllers based on (4.4.43) can be quite good if the outer-loop gains are selected
large enough. We study robustness formally in Chapter 4.
    In the remainder of this chapter we consider various special choices of
and       that give some special sorts of controllers. We shall present some
theorems and simulation examples that illustrate the robustness properties of
computed-torque control.

Error Dynamics with Approximate Control Law. Let us now derive the error
dynamics if the approximate computed-torque controller (4.4.43) is applied to
the robot arm (4.4.2). Substituting c(t) into the arm equation for (t) yields




Adding Mqd-Mqd to the left-hand side and Mu-Mu to the right gives




or

                                          ë=u-∆u+d,                        (4.4.44)

where the inertia and nonlinear-term model mismatch terms are

                                                                           (4.4.45)


                                                                           (4.4.46)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
204                                                      Computed-Torque Control



                    Table 4.4.1: Computed-Torque-Like Robot Controllers.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                  205

and the disturbance is

                                                                        (4.4.47)


This reduces to the error system (4.4.10) if exact computed-torque control
is used so that ∆=0, δ=0. Otherwise, the error system is driven by the
desired acceleration and the nonlinear term mismatch δ(t). Thus the tracking
error will never go exactly to zero. Moreover, the auxiliary control u(t) is
multiplied by (I -∆), which can make for a very difficult control problem.
   Using outer-loop PD feedback so that u(t)=-Kve-Kpe yields the error system

                                                                        (4.4.48)


The behavior of such systems is not obvious, even if Kv and Kp are selected for
good stability of the left-hand side. There are two sorts of problems: first, the
disturbance term d(t), and second the function ∆(Kve+Kpe) of the error and its
derivative.

PD-Plus-Gravity Controller
A useful controller in the computed-torque family is the PD-plus-gravity
controller that results when M=I, N=G(q)-qd, with G(q) the gravity term of
the manipulator dynamics. Then, selecting PD feedback for u(t) yields

                                                                        (4.4.49)


This control law was treated in [Arimoto and Miyazaki 1984], [Schilling
1990]. It is much simpler to implement than the exact computedtorque
controller.
   When the arm is at rest, the only nonzero terms in the dynamics (4.4.1)
are the gravity G(q), the disturbance d, and possibly the control torque .
The PD-gravity controller c, includes G(q), so that we should expect good
performance for set-point tracking, that is, when a constant qd is given so
that qd=0. The next result formalizes this. It relies on a Lyapunov proof
(Chapter 1) of the sort that will be of consistent usefulness throughout the
book, drawing especially on the skew-symmetry property in Table 3.3.1.
Thus it is very important to understand the steps in this proof.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
206                                                 Computed-Torque Control

THEOREM 4.4–1: Suppose that PD-gravity control is used in the arm
dynamics (4.4.1) and d=0, qd=0. Then the steady-state tracking error. e=qd-
q is zero.
Proof:
1. Closed-Loop System
   Ignoring friction, the robot dynamics are given by

                                                                             (1)

When qd=0, the proposed control law (4.4.49) yields the closed-loop dynamics

                                                                             (2)

2. Lyapunov Function
   Select now the Lyapunov function

                                                                             (3)

and differentiate to obtain

                                                                             (4)

Substituting the closed-loop dynamics (2) yields

                                                                             (5)

Now, the skew symmetry of the first term gives

                                                                             (6)

The state is                , so that V is positive definite but only negative
semidefinite. Therefore, we have demonstrated stability in the sense of
Lyapunov, that is, that the error and joint velocity are both bounded.

3. Asymptotic Stability by LaSalle’s Extension
   The asymptotic stability of the system may be demonstrated using Barbalat’s
lemma and a variant of LaSalle’s extension [Slotine and Li 1991] (Chapter
2). Thus it is necessary to demonstrate that the only invariant set contained in
the set V=0 is the origin.
   Since V is lower bounded by zero and nonpositive, it follows that V
approaches a finite limit, which can be written




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                  207


                                                                              (7)


We now invoke Barbalat’s lemma to show that V goes to zero. For this, it is
necessary to demonstrate the uniform continuity of V. We see that

                                                                              (8)

The demonstrated stability shows that a and q are bounded, whence (2) and
the boundedness of M-1(q) (see Table 3.3.1) reveal that q is bounded. Therefore,
V is bounded, whence V is uniformly continuous. This guarantees by Barbalat’s
lemma that V goes to zero.
   It is now clear that goes to zero. It remains to show that the tracking
error e(t) vanishes. Note that when q=0, (2) reveals that

                                                                              (9)

Therefore, a nonzero e(t) results in nonzero and hence in q≠0, a contradiction.
Therefore, the only invariant set contained in {x(t)|V=0} is x(t)=0. This finally
demonstrates that both e(t) and vanish and concludes the proof.                 䊏
   Some notes on this proof are warranted. First, note that the Lyapunov
function chosen is a natural one, as it contains the kinetic energy and the
“artificial potential energy” associated with the virtual spring in the control
law [Slotine and Li 1991]. Kp appears in V while Kv appears in V.
   The proof of Lyapunov stability is quick and easy. The effort comes about
in showing asymptotic stability. For this, it is required to return to the system
dynamics and study it more carefully, discussing issues such as boundedness
of signals, invariant sets, and so on. The fundamental property of skew
symmetry is used in computing V. The boundedness of M-1(q) is needed in
Barbalat’s lemma.
   The next example illustrates the performance of the PD-gravity controller
for trajectory tracking. In general, if qd≠0, then the PD-gravity controller
guarantees bounded tracking errors. The error bound decreases, that is, the
tracking performance improves, as the PD gains become larger. This will be
made rigorous in Chapter 4.

EXAMPLE 4.4–3: Simulation of PD-Gravity Controller
    In Example 4.4.1 we simulated the exact computed-torque control law on
    a two link planar manipulator. Here, let us simulate the PD-gravity
    controller. We shall take the same arm parameters and desired trajectory.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
208                                                   Computed-Torque Control

   Assuming identical PD gains for each link, the PD-gravity control law for
the two-link arm is


                                                                                 (1)


This is easily simulated by commenting out several lines of code and making
a few other modifications in subroutine CTL(x) of Figure 4.4.2.
   For critical damping, the PD gains are selected as

                                                                                 (2)


The results of the PD-gravity controller simulation for several values of wn
are shown in Figure 4.4.9. As ωn, and hence the PD gains, increases, the
tracking performance improves. However, no matter how large the PD gains,
the tracking error never goes exactly to zero, but is bounded about zero by a
ball whose radius decreases as the gains become larger. The performance for
ωn=50, corresponding to kp=2500, kv=100, would be quite suitable for many
applications.
   It quite important to note that the dc value of the errors is equal to zero.
One can consider the gravity terms as the “dc portion” of the computed-
torque control law. If they are included in computing the torques, there will
be no error offset.
   The associated control input torques are shown in Figure 4.4.10. It is
extremely interesting to note that the torques are smaller for the higher
gains. This is contrary to popular belief, which assumes that the control
torques always increase with increasing PD gains. It is due to the fact that
larger gains give “tighter” performance, and hence smaller tracking errors.
   In view of the fact that the errors in Figure 4.4.9(a) have different magnitudes,
it would probably be more reasonable to take the PD gains larger for the
inner link than the outer link.
                                                                                  䊏

Classical Joint Control
A simple controller that often gives good results in practice is obtained by
selecting in (4.4.43)

                                                                           (4.4.50)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                      209




Figure 4.4.9: PD-gravity tracking error e1(t), e2(t) (red): (a) wn=10 rad/s; (b) wn=25
rad/s.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
210                                                               Computed-Torque Control




                                   Figure 4.4.9: (Cont.) (c)wn=50 rad/s.




Then there results

                                                                                  (4.4.51)

By selecting ui to depend only on joint variable i, this describes n decoupled
individual joint controllers and is called independent joint control.
Implementation on an actual robot arm is easy since the control input for
joint i only depends on locally measured variables, not on the variables of the
other joints. Moreover, the computations are easy and do not involve solving
the complicated nonlinear robot inverse dynamics.
   During the early days of robotics, independent joint control was popular
[Paul 1981] since it allows a decoupled analysis of the closed-loop system
using single-input/single-output (SISO) classical techniques. It is also called
classical joint control. There are strong arguments even today by several
researchers that this control scheme is always suitable in practical
implementations, and that modern nonlinear control schemes are too
complicated for industrial robotic applications.
   A traditional analysis of independent joint control control now follows. It
provides a connection with classical control notions and is important for the



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                   211




Figure 4.4.10: PD-gravity torque inputs (N-m): (a) wn=10 rad/s; (b) wn=25 rad/s.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
212                                                              Computed-Torque Control




                                  Figure 4.4.10: (Cont) (c) wn=50 rad/s.



robot controls designer to understand. See [Franklin et al. 1986] for a reference
on classical control theory.
   A simplified dynamical model of a robot arm with electric actuators may
be written as (Section 3.6)


                                                                                 (4.4.52)


with Jm the actuator motor inertia, Bm the rotor damping constant, km the
torque constant, kb the back emf constant, R the armature resistance, and ri
the gear ratio for joint i. The motor angle is denoted θi(t). The constant portions
of the diagonal elements of M(q) are denoted mii. The time-varying portions
of these elements, as well as the off-diagonal elements of M(q), the nonlinear
terms N(q, ), and any disturbances d are all lumped into the disturbance
di(t). Thus di(t) contains the effects on joint i of all the other joints. The control
input is the motor armature voltage vi(t).
    Note that predominantly motor parameters appear in this equation. In
fact, if the gear ratio is small, even mii may be neglected. For this reason, if
the gear ratio is small, the robot arm control problem virtually reduces to the
problem of controlling the actuator motors.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                     213

   Let us denote this simplified linear time-invariant model of manipulator
joint i as

                                                                            (4.4.53)

where the constant km/R has been incorporated into the definitions of J and B.
According to the properties in Table 3.3.1, the disturbance d(t) is bounded,
although not generally by a constant. The bound may be a function of q(t), (t),
and even (t). This is generally ignored in a classical analysis. The effects of
d(t) are, however, somewhat ameliorated by multiplication by the gear ratio r.
The effects of joint compliance (Chapter 6) are also ignored in classical joint
control design. [For consistency with classical notation, there is a sign change
in this section in the definition of u(t) compared to our previous usage.]
    Now, let us consider a few selections for the control input u(t).

PD Control. Selecting the PD control law

                                             u=kve+kpe,                     (4.4.54)




                             Figure 4.4.11: PD independent joint control.

with e(t)=θdi (t)-θi(t) the tracking error for motor angle i, yields the closed-loop
system shown in Figure 4.4.11. Recall that the motor angle is related to the
joint variable by qi=riθi. Thus θd(t) may be computed from qdi(t). This PD
controller is easily implemented on an actual arm with very little computing
power.
   Using Mason’s theorem from classical control, the closed-loop transfer
function for set-point tracking (e.g., with θd=0) is found to be (see the
problems)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
214                                                 Computed-Torque Control


                                                                        (4.4.55)


with the closed-loop characteristic polynomial

                                                                        (4.4.56)

The PD gains can be selected to obtain a suitable natural frequency and
damping ratio, as we have seen.
   At steady state, the only nonzero contribution to the disturbance d(t) is the
neglected gravity G(q). Table 3.3.1 shows that the gravity vector is bounded
by a known value gb for a given robot arm. Therefore, at steady state,


   Using the final value theorem, the steady-state tracking error for joint i
using PD control is bounded by
                                                                        (4.4.57)
Therefore, for set-point tracking where a final value for qd is specified and
         PD control with a large kp might be suitable.
    As a matter of fact, the next results show that PD control is often very
suitable even for following a desired trajectory, not only for set-point control.
It is proven in [Dawson 1990].

THEOREM 4.4–2: If the PD control law (4.4.54) is applied to each joint and
e(0)=0, (0)=0, the position and velocity tracking errors are bounded within a
ball whose radius decreases approximately (for large k v )
as       .

                                                                            䊏
   This result gives credence to those who maintain that PD control is often
good enough for practical applications.
   Of course, the point is that kv cannot be increased without limit without
hitting the actuator torque limits. Other schemes to be discussed in the book
allow good trajectory following without such large torques.
   In [Paul 1981] are discussed several methods for modifying the PD control
law to obtain better performance. These include gravity compensation [which
yields exactly controller (4.4.49)], and acceleration feedforward, which
amounts to using

                                                                        (4.4.58)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                     215

for each joint. Also mentioned is joint-coupling control, which amounts to
adding back into u(t) some of the neglected terms in M(q) and N(q, )that
describe the interactions between the joints. Thus such corrections involve
using better estimates for    and     in the approximate computed-torque
control (4.4.43).

PID Control. It has been seen that PD independent joint control is often suitable
for tracking control. However, at steady state there is a residual error (4.4.57)
due to gravity. This can be removed using the PID independent joint control
law


                                                                            (4.4.59)

for each joint. See Figure 4.4.12.




                            Figure 4.4.12: PID independent joint control.




Now the transfer function for set-point tracking                       is


                                                                            (4.4.60)


with closed-loop characteristic polynomial

                                                                            (4.4.61)

Now the final value theorem shows that the steady-state error for set-point
control is zero. The Routh test shows that for stability it is required that


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
216                                                 Computed-Torque Control




Figure 4.4.13: PD classical joint control tracking error e 1 (t), e 2 (t) (red):
(a) n=10 rad/s; (b) n=25 rad/s.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                    217




                                  Figure 4.4.13 (Cont.) (c) n=50 rad/s.


                                                                           (4.4.62)

   In using an integral term in the control law, it is important to be aware of
the possibility of integrator windup due to actuator saturation limits, which
was discussed earlier in the section “PID Outer-Loop Design.”

EXAMPLE 4.4–4: Classical Joint Control and Torque Saturation Limits
    In Example 4.4.1 we simulated the exact computed-torque control law for
    a two-link planar elbow arm. Here we want to show the results of using
    PD and PID classical joint control on the same arm (with the same desired
    trajectory). We are also interested in demonstrating the effects of torque
    saturation limits. To highlight the effects without extraneous details, we
    shall use only the arm dynamics and no actuator dynamics or gear ratio.
    These may easily be included by making some slight modifications to the
    subroutine arm(x, xp) in Figure 4.4.2.


    a. PD Independent Joint Control
    For the two-link arm, PD independent joint control is simply




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
218                                             Computed-Torque Control




Figure 4.4.14: PD classical joint control torque inputs (N-m): (a)  n =10
rad/s; (b) n=25 rad/s.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                 219




                                  Figure 4.4.14 (Cont.) (c) n=50 rad/s.

                                                                             (1)

with the tracking error e(t)=qd(t)-q(t). This control law is very simple and
direct to implement on an actual arm without even using a DSP. It is much
simpler than the control in Example 4.4.1.
   The results of using the PD controller on the two-link arm are shown in
Figure 4.4.13 for several values of a closed-loop natural frequency wn. Recall
that the PD gains for critical damping are

                                                                             (2)

The low-gain results (kp=100, kv=20) in part (a) of the figure are very bad
(note the scale). However, the high-gain results in part (c) are much better.
Even higher gains would cause a further tracking error decrease.
   It is important to notice that there is in all cases a do component of the
tracking error. This is due to the fact that the gravity terms are neglected and
should be contrasted with the results of Example 4.4.3.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
220                                                   Computed-Torque Control




Figure 4.4.15: PD classical joint control: kv=100, kp=2500, ki=1000.




    Adding the gravity terms in the control law, therefore, significantly increases
    the tracking performance.
       The associated control torques are shown in Figure 4.4.14.


    b. PID Independent Joint Control
    PID independent joint control for the two-link arm is

                                                                                (3)

    This simple law is easily implemented by adding two states, x(5) and x(6),
    to subroutine arm(x, xp) in Figure 4.4.2 to account for the integrators (see
    Example 4.4.2).
       The simulation in Figure 4.4.13(c) was repeated, but now adding an
    integral gain of ki=1000. The result is shown in Figure 4.4.15. After several
    iterations of the sinusoidal motion, the do value of the tracking errors goes
    to zero, so that the performance is much improved. That is, adding an
    integral term can compensate for neglecting the gravity terms in the control




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.4 Computed-Torque Control                                                   221




Figure 4.4.16: PID classical joint control with torque limits of ±35 N-m. Tracking
error in rads.


    law. However, it takes awhile for the error to converge to a zero do value,
    and the results are still not as good as the PD-gravity controller in Example
    4.4.3 for the same PD gains. On the other hand, the integral term can
    reject other terms besides gravity (e.g., friction of some sorts). The torque
    control input was virtually the same in form as Figure 4.4.14(c).


    c. Actuator Saturation Limits
    We discussed integrator windup due to actuator saturation limits earlier in
    the section “PID Outer-Loop Design.” Here we should like to demonstrate
    its deleterious effects.
        The control torque in part (b) of this example is similar to the torque in
    Figure 4.4.14(c); it is fairly well behaved, except for some frantic action
    near time zero, where the maximum positive excursion is 78 N-m.
        Suppose now that there are torque limits of tmax=35 N-m, tmin= -35 N-m.
    This is easily simulated by modifying subroutine CTL(x) in Figure 4.4.2 to
    include a saturation function by adding the lines




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
222                                                 Computed-Torque Control




Figure 4.4.17: PID classical joint control with torque limits of ±35 N-m. Torque
inputs in N-m.




                                                                             (4)


The results of the simulation with these limits are shown in Figure 4.4.16 and
are terrible. The torque is shown in Figure 4.4.17.
   In Section 4.5 we show how to ameliorate the effects of actuator
saturation by using antiwindup protection in a digital controller. The
simulation results for PD control with actuator limits are not as bad as the
ones just shown for PID control, since saturation limits have less effect if
no integrator is present.
                                                                             䊏
4.5 Digital Robot Control

Many robot control schemes are complicated and involve a great deal of
computation for the evaluation of nonlinear terms. Therefore, they are
implemented as digital control laws on digital signal processors (DSPs). Certain




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.5 Digital Robot Control                                                      223

sorts of digital controllers for robot arms can be considered as members of the
computer-torque-like class (see Table 4.4.1).
   One approach to digital robot control is shown in Figure 4.5.1. There, a
                                  .
sampler is placed on q(t) and q(t) to define




                              Figure 4.5.1: Digital robot control scheme.


                                                                            (4.5.1)

with T the sample period. Sample periods in robotic applications vary from
about 1 to 20 ms. A zero-order hold is used to reconstruct the continuous-time
control input (t)needed for the actuators from the samples k. In this section
we use superscripts “d” for the desired trajectory for notational ease.
  This digital control law amounts to selecting

                                                                            (4.5.2)

in the approximate computed-torque controller in Table 4.4.1 and a digital
outer loop control signal uk. Then, with PD outer-loop control, the arm control
input is

                                                                            (4.5.3)

where the tracking error is e(t)=qd(t)-q(t). There are many variations of this
control scheme. For instance, it is very reasonable to use multirate sampling
and update and less frequently than the sampling frequency. That is, the




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
224                                                               Computed-Torque Control

inner nonlinear loop can be sampled more slowly than the outer linear feedback
loop. In view of the robustness properties of computed-torque control, this
works quite well in practice.

Guaranteed Performance on Sampling
It is usual in robot controls to design the controller in continuous time, providing
rigorous proofs of stability and error boundedness. However, when the controller
is implemented, a “small” sample period is selected and the stability is left to
chance and verified by simulation studies. That this “wishful thinking”
approach may not be so unreasonable is suggested by the next theorem. Define
                  .

THEOREM 4.5–1: Suppose that the PD digital control law (4.5.3) is applied
to the robot arm. Then for every L>0 there exists a TM such that for all
sampling periods T less than TM, each error trajectory which at some time to
satisfies ||e(t0)||L has ||e(t)||L+r for all tt0 and any r>0.

Proof:
  Using the digital control law yields the error system (Table 4.4.1)

                                                                                       (1)

where and

                                                                                       (2)

Defining                                  this may be written in state-space form as


                                                                                       (3)


Applying now the outer-loop digital control

                                                                                       (4)

yields the closed-loop system

                                                                                       (5)

The feedback K is selected so that (A-BK) is stable; hence




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.5 Digital Robot Control                                                 225

                                                                           (6)

for some positive definite P and Q.
   Selecting now the Lyapunov function

                                                                           (7)

(5) and (6) reveal

                                                                           (8)

Assuming for simplicity that the disturbance d is zero, note that

                                                                           (9)

is negative definite at each sample time. [If d is nonzero but bounded, then
V(ek) is negative outside some ball, and the discussion may be modified.]
   The remainder of the proof follows from a theorem of [LaSalle and Lefschetz
1961] by showing that:

      1.
      2. V( (t 1 ))<V( (t 2 )) for all t 2  t 1  0 when || (t 1 )||  L and
         || (t2)||>L+r.

At issue is the fact (9) and the continuity of                              䊏

This result shows that good tracking is obtained for all sample periods less
than some maximum sample period TM which depends on the specific robot
arm. A more refined result can show that the errors increase as the maximum
desired acceleration increases, or equivalently, that smaller sample periods
are required for larger desired accelerations.
   We now discuss some issues in discretizing the inner nonlinear loop and
then the outer linear loop.

Discretization of Inner Nonlinear Loop
There is no convenient exact way to discretize nonlinear dynamics. Given
a nonlinear state-space system
                                                                       (4.5.4)
Euler’s approximation yields

                                                                       (4.5.5)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
226                                                  Computed-Torque Control

   There do exist “exact” techniques for deriving discrete nonlinear robot
dynamics. They rely on discretizing the robot arm dynamics in such a way
that energy and momentum are conserved at each sampling instant [Neuman
and Tourassis 1985]. See also [Elliott 1990]. Unfortunately, these schemes
result in extremely complicated discrete dynamical equations, even for simple
robot arms. It is very difficult to derive guaranteed digital control laws for
them.
   In this section we simply take the discretized inner nonlinear loop as given
by the approximation (4.5.2).

Joint Velocity Estimates from Position Measurements
Throughout this chapter in the examples we have simulated continuous-time
robot controllers assuming that both the joint positions and velocities are
measured exactly. In point of fact, it is usual to measure the joint velocities
using optical encoders, and then estimate the joint velocities from these position
measurements. Simply computing the joint velocities using the Euler
approximation

                                                                          (4.5.6)

is virtually doomed to failure, since this high-pass filter amplifies the encoder
measurement noise.
    Denote the joint velocity estimates by vk. Then a filtered derivative can be
used to compute vk from qk using

                                                                          (4.5.7)

where ν is a design parameter. If ν is small, it corresponds to a fast pole near
z=0, which provides some high-pass filtering to reject unwanted sensor noise.
Example 4.5.1 will illustrate the use of this joint velocity estimation filter.
    The velocity estimation filter design can be optimized for the given encoder
noise statistics by using an alpha-beta tracker to reconstruct vk [Lewis 1986a],
[Lewis 1986b], [Lowe and Lewis 1991]. This is a specialized form of Kalman
filter. It should be noted that the velocity estimates are not only used in the
outer linear loop for computing k; they must be used to compute the inner
nonlinear terms in (4.5.3) as well.

Discretization of Outer PD/PID Control Loop
We have seen that a useful computed-torque outer feedback loop is the PID
controller. Given a continuous-time PID controller, a digital PID controller
for the outer loop may be designed as follows [Lewis 1992].



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.5 Digital Robot Control                                                     227

   A continuous PID controller that only uses joint position measurements q(t)
is given by



                                                                           (4.5.8)



where k is the proportional gain, T1 is the integration time constant or “reset”
time, TD is the derivative time constant. Rather than use pure differentiation,
a “filtered derivative” is used which has a pole far left in the s-plane at s=-N/
TD. The value for N is often in the range 3 to 10; it is usually fixed by the
manufacturer of the controller [Åström and Wittenmark 1984]. A special case
of the PID controller, of course, is the PD controller, which is therefore also
covered by this discussion.
   A common approximate discretization technique for converting continuous-
time controllers Kc(s) to digital controllers K(z) is the bilinear transform (BLT),
where

                                                                           (4.5.9)



                                                                          (4.5.10)


This corresponds to approximating integration by the trapezoidal rule. Under
this mapping, stable continuous systems with poles at s are mapped into
stable discrete systems with poles at

                                                                          (4.5.11)

The finite zeros also map according to this transformation. However, the
zeros at infinity in the s-plane map into zeros at z=-1.
   Using the BLT to discretize (4.5.8) yields

                                                                          (4.5.12)

with the discrete integral and derivative time constants

                                                                          (4.5.13)


                                                                          (4.5.14)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
228                                                 Computed-Torque Control

and the derivative-filtering pole at


                                                                        (4.5.15)


   It is easy to implement this digital outer-loop filter in terms of difference
equations on a DSP. First, write K(z) in terms of z-1, which is the unit delay in
the time domain (i.e., a delay of T seconds), as


                                                                        (4.5.16)


[Note: There is some abuse in notation in denoting (4.5.16) as K(z-1); this we
shall accept.]
   Now suppose that the control input uk is related to the tracking error as

                                                                        (4.5.17)

Then uk may be computed from past and present values of ek using auxiliary
variables as follows:
                                                                        (4.5.18)
                                                                        (4.5.19)
                                                                        (4.5.20)

The variables            represent the integral and derivative portions of the
digital PID controller, respectively. These difference equations are easily
implemented in software.

Actuator Saturation and Integrator Antiwindup Compensation
Actuator saturation leading to integrator windup is a problem that can occur
in the outer PID loop of a robot controller. In Example 4.4.4 we saw the
deleterious effects of integrator windup. It is easy to implement antiwindup
protection digitally [Åström and Wittenmark 1984], [Lewis 1992]. The
antiwindup protection circuit would be placed into the outer linear feedback
loop of a robot control system, where the integrator (controller memory) is
located.
   Suppose that the controller is given in transfer function form

                                                                        (4.5.21)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.5 Digital Robot Control                                                     229

where rk is the reference command and wk is the controller input, composed
generally of the tracking error and the plant measured output. Note that z-1 is
interpreted in the time domain as a unit delay of T seconds. The controller
output vk is passed through a hold device to generate the continuous plant
control input u(t).
    We have assumed thus far that the desired plant control input
computed by the controller can actually be applied to the plant. However, in
practical systems the plant inputs (such as motor voltages, etc.) are limited by
maximum and minimum allowable values. Thus the relation between the
desired plant input vk and the actual plant input uk is given by the sort of
behavior shown in Figure 4.5.2, where uH and uL represent, respectively, the
maximum and minimum control effort allowed by the mechanical actuator.
If there are no control limits, we may set uk=vk.




                              Figure 4.5.2: Actuator saturation function.

Thus, to describe the actual case in a practical control system with actuator
saturation, we are forced to include nonlinear saturation functions in the
control channels as shown in Figure 4.5.3. Consider the simple case where the
controller is an integrator with input wk and output vk. Then all is well as
long as vk is between uL and uH, for in this region the plant input uk equals vk.
However, if vk exceeds uH, then uk is limited to its maximum value uH—This
in itself may not be a problem. The problem arises if wk remains positive, for
then the integrator continues to integrate and vk may increase well beyond
uH. Then, when wk becomes negative, it may take considerable time for vk to
decrease below uH. In the meantime, uk is held at uH, giving an incorrect
control input to the plant. This effect of integrator saturation is called windup.
It arises because the controllers we design are generally dynamical in nature,



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
230                                                    Computed-Torque Control

which means that they store information or energy. Windup occurs when R(z)
is not a stable polynomial.
   To correct integrator windup, it is necessary to limit the state of the controller
so that it is consistent with the saturation effects being experienced by the
plant input uk. This may be accomplished as follows. Select a desired stable
observer polynomial A0(z) and add A0(z-1)uk to both sides to obtain

                                                                            (4.5.22)

A regulator with antiwindup compensation is then given by

                                                                            (4.5.23)

                                                                            (4.5.24)

   A special case occurs when A0(z) has all n of its poles at the origin. Then
the regulator displays deadbeat behavior; after n time steps its state remains
limited to an easily computed value dependent on the values of wk and uk (see
the Problems).




Figure 4.5.3: Control system including actuator saturation.

The next example demonstrates some aspects of digital control in robotics.

EXAMPLE 4.5–1: Simulation of Digital Robot Computed-Torque
Controller
    In Example 4.4.1 we simulated a continuous-time PD computed-torque
    (CT) controller for the two-link planar elbow arm. In this example some
    issues in




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.5 Digital Robot Control                                                    231




    Figure 4.5–4: Subroutines for use with TRESP for digital CT control.

    discretizing that controller are demonstrated. There are two objectives.
    First, we show the effects of sampling on the CT controller. Then a practical
    digital controller is designed that uses only joint position measurements
    from an encoder, reconstructing the velocities needed for computing the
    control law.



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
232                                            Computed-Torque Control




Figure 4.5.5: Joint tracking error on sampling the CT controller: (a) T=5
ms; (b) T=20 ms.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.5 Digital Robot Control                                                   233




                         Figure 4.5.5: (Cont.) (c) T=50 ms; (d) T=100 ms.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
234                                           Computed-Torque Control




Figure 4.5.6: Link 2 torque input in the digital CT controller: (a) T=5
ms; (b) T=50 ms.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.5 Digital Robot Control                                                     235




                                   Figure 4.5.6: (Cont.) (c) T=100 ms.



    a. Effect of Sample Period on Digital Computed-Torque Controller
    In Example 4.4.1 were given the subroutines needed for use with TRESP
    (Appendix B) to simulate the continuous-time PD CT controller. To simulate
    a digitized version of PD CT control, it is necessary to remove the controller
    subroutine [called CTL(x) in that example] from the continuous dynamics
    and place it into the subroutine DIG (IK, T, x) that is called by TRESP. This
    is in keeping with Figure 4.5.1 and the technique given in Section 4.3 for
    digital controller simulation.
       In Figure 4.5.4 are shown the modified subroutines DIG(IK, TD, x) and
    F(t, x, xp) needed for digital CT controller simulation with TRESP.
    Subroutines SYSINP(IT, x, t) for trajectory generation and ARM(x, xp)
    containing the arm dynamics are the same as in Example 4.4.1.
       Running now program TRESP with different sample periods T yields
    the tracking error plots shown in Figure 4.5.5. The Runge-Kutta integration
    period was 5 ms for all plots. The graphs show that for T=5 ms the error




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
236                                                   Computed-Torque Control

    was very small, in fact very similar to that in Example 4.4.1. However, as
    the sampling period T increased the tracking performance deteriorated.
       The torque input for joint 2 is depicted in Figure 4.5.6. For small T is is
    virtually identical to the continuous CT controller in Example 4.4.1. A
    very interesting phenomenon occurs when T=0.1 s. According to the plot
    in Figure 4.5.6(c), there is a limit cycle, a form of nonlinear oscillation. It
    is well known that sampling can induce such nonlinear effects in the closed-
    loop system [Lewis 1992]. According to Figure 4.5.5(d), the limit cycle is
    reflected in the tracking error as a periodic oscillation about e(t)=0. The
    appearance of limit cycles is closely tied to a loss of observability in the
    sampled system.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.5 Digital Robot Control                                                      237




    Figure 4.5–7: Digital control subroutine that uses only joint position
    measurements.


    b. Digital Controller with Only Position Measurements
    In part a we assumed that joint positions and velocities are both available
    as measurements. In practical situations, only the joint positions are
    available, often from optical encoder measurements. Therefore, here we
    should like to design a realistic digital CT controller that reconstructs the
    velocities.
        The subroutines in Figure 4.5.7 uses only position measurements,
    estimating the joint velocities using the derivative filter (4.5.7). The
    resultant tracking error is shown in Figure 4.5.8. The performance is
    comparable to the controller in part a that used velocity measurements,
    with the exception of a larger initial error transient. The value of the
    filter pole v was taken as 0.1.
        Some implementation details are worthy of note. First, it is very
    important how the digital controller is initialized. Note the code lines that
    zero the velocity estimates in the first iteration (IK=0). It is a good exercise
    to repeat this simulation deleting these lines (see the Problems).
        Second, it might be thought that a reasonable procedure for finding the
    velocity error k= (kT) is to find an estimate vk of the joint velocity k and
    then use

                                                                                 (1)

    There are two disadvantages to this. First, it requires the storage in memory
    of the desired velocity as well as the desired trajectory Second, it does
    not work.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
238                                                      Computed-Torque Control




    Figure 4.5.8: Tracking error for digital controller using no velocity measurements:
    (a) T=5 ms; (b) T=20 ms.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.5 Digital Robot Control                                                      239

   Instead, it is necessary to use two derivative filters, one for estimating joint
velocities and one for providing an estimate for the velocity error k. A
simulation that attempts to use 1 makes the point quite well.
   Note that the velocity estimates are also used instead of in computing
the nonlinear terms

                                                                                 䊏


EXAMPLE 4.5–2: Digital PI Controller with Anti-windup Compensation
    A general digital PI controller with sampling period of T seconds is
    given by


                                                                                (1)


    We have sampled the continuous PI controller by the modified matched-
    polezero (MPZ) method [Lewis 1992] to obtain a delay of T seconds in the
    integrator to allow for computation time. The proportional gain is k and
    the reset time is TI; both are fixed in the design stage. The tracking error is
    ek .
         Multiply by (1-z-1) to write

                                                                                (2)

    which is in the transfer function form (4.5.21). The corresponding difference
    equation form for implementation is

                                                                                (3)

    This controller will experience windup problems since the autoregressive
    polynomial R=1- z-1 has a root at z=1, making it marginally stable. Thus,
    when uk is limited, the integrator will continue to integrate, “winding up”
    beyond the saturation level.


    a. Antiwindup Compensation
    To correct this problem, select an observer polynomial of

                                                                                (4)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
240                                                Computed-Torque Control

    which has a pole at some desirable location |α|<1. The design parameter α
    may be selected by simulation studies. Then the controller with antiwindup
    protection (4.5.23), (4.5.24) is given by


                                                                            (5)



                                                                            (6)

The corresponding difference equations for implementation are

                                                                            (7)


                                                                            (8)

A few lines of FORTRAN code implementing this digital controller are given
in Figure 4.5.9. This subroutine may be used as the control update routine
DIG for the digital simulation driver program TRESP in Appendix B.




    Figure 4.5–9: FORTRAN code implementing PI controller with antiwindup
    compensation.

       If α=1 we obtain the special case (2), which is called the position form
    and has no antiwindup compensation. If α=0, we obtain the deadbeat
    antiwindup compensation




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.5 Digital Robot Control                                                    241


                                                                              (9)

    with corresponding difference equation implementation

                                                                            (10)

    If uk is not in saturation, this amounts to updating the plant control by
    adding the second and third terms on the right-hand side of (10) to uk-1.
    These terms are, therefore, nothing but uk-uk-1. The compensator with α=0
    is thus called the velocity form of the PI controller.


    b. Digital Control of DC Motor
    Consider the simplified model for a do motor given by

                                                                            (11)

    with  the angular velocity. A motor speed controller has the form

                                                                            (12)

where e=r-w is the tracking error, with r the desired command angular velocity.
Taking a=1 and b=1, with k1=k2=-3.318, we obtain poles at s=-1, -3.318. The
slower pole is canceled by a zero, so that the step response is fast, having only
a mode like e-3.318t.
     Writing the PI controller as

                                                                            (13)

    we see that


                                                                            (14)


    The digital controller obtained using the modified MPZ is given by (1).
       The time constant of the closed-loop system is                     so
    that a sampling period of T=0.05 s is reasonable. The sampling period
    should be about one-tenth the time constant.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
242                                                     Computed-Torque Control

       Program TRESP in Appendix B was used to obtain the response shown
    in Figure 4.5.10(a). No saturation limits were imposed on uk.
       Next, a saturation limit of uH=1.5 V was imposed on the control uk. No
    antiwindup compensation was used (i.e., α=1 in Figure 4.5.9). The resulting
    behavior shown in Figure 4.5.10(b) displays an unacceptable overshoot.
       Figure 4.5.10(c) shows that the overshoot problem is easily corrected
    using α=0.9 in the digital PI controller with antiwindup protection in Figure
    4.5.9. In this example, as a decreases the step response slows down. The
    value of α=0.9 was selected after several simulation runs with different
    values of α.




Figure 4.5.10: Angular velocity step responses using digital controller: (a) digital PI
controller with no saturation limits; (b) digital PI controller with saturation limit
uH=1.5V and no antiwindup compensation; (c) digital PI controller with saturation
limit uH=1.5V and antiwindup compensation with α=0.9.


    c. Antiwindup Compensation in Robotics
    To implement the antiwindup compensation, it is necessary to know the
    maximum and minimum values uH and uL of the integrator output.
    Unfortunately, in a robot arm the motor torques are limited. These torque




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.6 Optimal Outer-Loop Design                                                    243

    limits must be mapped using the feedback linearization input transformation
    to determine the limits on the integrator outputs see [Bobrow et al. 1983].
    Thus the saturation limits needed by the antiwindup compensator are
    functions of the joint position q, the desired acceleration and so on. This
    issue is explored in the problems.
                                                                             䊏

4.6 Optimal Outer-Loop Design

In Section 4.4 we discussed computed-torque control, showing how to select
the inner control loop using exact techniques involving the inverse manipulator
dynamics, as well as by a variety of approximate means. We also discussed
several schemes for designing the outer linear feedback (tracking) loop. The
results of our discussions are summarized in Table 4.4.1. In this section we
intend to present a modern control optimal technique for selecting the outer
feedback loop. Modern optimal design yields improved robustness in the
presence of disturbances and unmodeled dynamics.
   Several papers have dealt with “optimal” or “suboptimal” control of robot
manipulators [Vukobratovic and Stokic 1983], [Lee et al. 1983], [Luo and
Saridis 1985], [Johansson 1990]. Although they are not all based on a
computed-torque-like approach, we would like here to present the flavor of
this work by using optimal techniques to design the computed-torque outer
feedback loop.

Linear Quadratic Optimal Control
First, it is necessary to review modern linear-quadratic (LQ) design. Suppose
that we are given the linear time-invariant system in state-space form

                                                                              (4.6.1)

with                                      It is desired to compute the state-feedback
gain in

                                                                              (4.6.2)

so that the closed-loop system

                                                                              (4.6.3)

is asymptotically stable. Moreover, we do not want to use too much control
energy to stabilize the system, since in many modern systems (e.g., automobile,
spacecraft), fuel or energy is limited.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
244                                                  Computed-Torque Control

   This is a complex multivariable design problem, for the feedback gain
matrix K is of dimension m×n. A classical controls approach might involve,
for instance, performing mn root locus designs to close the feedback loops one
at a time. On the other hand, a solution that guarantees stability can be found
using modern controls techniques simply by solving some standard matrix
design equations. This modern approach closes all the feedback loops
simultaneously and guarantees a good gain and phase margin.
   The feedback matrix is found using modern control theory as follows.
First, define a quadratic performance index (PI) of the form


                                                                          (4.6.4)


where Q is a symmetric positive semidefinite n×n matrix (denoted Q0) and
R is a symmetric positive definite m×m matrix (R>0). That is, all eigenvalues
of R are greater than zero and those of Q are greater than or equal to zero. Q
is called the state-weighting matrix and R the control-weighting matrix. These
matrices are design parameters that are selected by the engineer depending,
for instance, on the desired form of the closed-loop time responses.
    The optimal LQ feedback gain K is the one that minimizes the PI J. The
motivation follows. The quadratic terms xTQx and uTRu in the PI are
generalized energy functions (e.g., the energy in a capacitor is ½Cv2, the
kinetic energy of motion is ½mv2). Suppose, then, that J is minimized in the
closed-loop system (4.6.3). This means that the infinite integral of
[xT(t)Qx(t)+uT(t)Ru(t)] is finite, so that this function of time goes to zero as t
becomes large. However,




with the square root of a matrix defined as                       . Since these
norms vanish with t and |R|0, the functions                   and u(t) both go
to zero. Under the assumption that          is observable [Kailath 1980], x(t)
goes to zero if y(t) does.
   Therefore, the optimal gain K guarantees that all signals go to zero with
time in the closed-loop system (4.6.3). That is, K stabilizes (A-BK).
   The determination of the optimal K is easy and is a standard result in
modern control theory (see, e.g., [Lewis 1986a], [Lewis 1986b]). The optimal
feedback gain is simply found by solving the matrix design equations



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.6 Optimal Outer-Loop Design                                                  245

                                                                            (4.6.5)

                                                                            (4.6.6)

where P is a symmetric n×n auxiliary design matrix on which the optimal
gain depends. The second of these is a nonlinear matrix quadratic equation
known as the Riccati equation; it is easy to solve this equation for the auxiliary
matrix P using standard routines in, for instance, MATLAB, [MATRIXx 1989],
and other software design packages.
   The next result is of prime importance in modern control theory and
formalizes the stability discussion just given.

THEOREM 4.6–1: Let                        be observable and (A, B) be controllable.
Then:

(a) There is a unique positive definite solution P to the Riccati equation.
(b) The closed-loop system (A-BK) is asymptotically stable.
(c) The closed-loop system has an infinite gain margin and 60° of phase
margin.
                                                                                䊏
Controllability was discussed in Chapter 1. Observability means roughly
speaking that all the system modes have an independent effect in the PI, so
that if J is bounded, all the modes independently go to zero with t. To verify
these properties is easy. The system is controllable if the controllability matrix
                                                                            (4.6.7)

has full rank n. The system (A, C) is observable if the observability matrix




                                                                            (4.6.8)




has full rank n. MATLAB, for instance, provides routines for these tests.
Therefore, the state-weighting matrix Q may be chosen to satisfy the
observability requirement.
  The theorem makes this modern design approach very powerful. No matter
how many inputs and states, a stabilizing feedback gain can always be found
under the hypotheses that stabilizes the system. The gain is found by closing



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
246                                               Computed-Torque Control

all the nm feedback loops simultaneously by solving the matrix design
equations.

Linear Quadratic Computed-Torque Design
Now we apply these results to the control of the robot manipulator dynamics
                                                                      (4.6.9)
According to Section 4.4, the computed-torque control law

                                                                     (4.6.10)

yields the error system

                                                                     (4.6.11)


which we may write as
                                                                     (4.6.12)
with the state defined as


                                                                     (4.6.13)


Now, select the outer-loop PD feedback

                                                                     (4.6.14)

To find a stabilizing gain K, select the design parameter Q in the PI as



so that the position and velocity errors are independently weighted. Then,
due to the simple form of the A and B matrices, which represent n de-coupled
Newton’s law (i.e., double integrator) systems, the solution of the Riccati
equation is easily found (see the Problems). Using this solution in (4.6.5)
yields the formula for the optimal stabilizing gains

                                                                     (4.6.15)

This LQ approach reveals the relation between the PD gains and some design
parameters Q and R that determine the total energy in the closed-loop system.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.6 Optimal Outer-Loop Design                                                247

Note particularly that the relative magnitudes of x(t) and u(t) in the closed-
loop system can be traded off. Indeed, if R is relatively larger than Qp and Qv,
the control effort in the PI (4.6.4) is weighted more heavily that the state.
Then the optimal control will attempt to keep u(t) smaller by selecting smaller
control gains; thus the response time will increase. On the other hand, selecting
a smaller R will increase the PD gains and make the error vanish more quickly.
   If Qp, Qν, and R are diagonal, so then are the PD gains Kp, Kv. The LQ
approach with nondiagonal Qp, Qv, and R affords the possibility of outer
feedback loops that are coupled between the joints, which can sometimes
improve performance. Another important feature of LQ design is the
guaranteed robustness mentioned in the theorem. This can be very useful in
approximate computed-torque design where

                                                                        (4.6.16)

and and can be simplified versions of M(q) and N(q, ). The performance
of such a controller with an LQ-design outer loop can be expected to surpass
that of a controller designed using arbitrary choices for Kp and Kv. This robust
aspect of LQ design is explored in the problems.
   It is important to note that this LQ design results in minimum closed-loop
energy in terms of e(t), (t), and u(t). However, the actual control input into
the robot arm is

                                                                        (4.6.17)

Although the energy in τ(t) is not minimized using this approach, we can use
some norm inequalities to write

                                                                        (4.6.18)

so that keeping small ||u(t)|| might be expected to make      smaller. A more
formal statement can be made taking into account the bounds on ||M(q)|| and
           given in Table 3.3.1.
   Since the energy in is not formally minimized in this approach, it is
considered as a suboptimal approach with respect to the actual arm dynamics,
although with respect to the error system and u(t) it is optimal. An optimal
control approach that weights e(t) τ(t) and in the PI is given in [Johansson
1990].
   We have derived an LQ controller using a computed-torque (i.e., feedback
linearization) approach. An alternative approach that yields the same Riccati-
equation-based design is to employ the full nonlinear arm dynamics and find
an approximate (i.e., time-invariant) solution to the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
equation [Luo and Saridis 1985]; [Luo et al. 1986].


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
248                                                 Computed-Torque Control


4.7 Cartesian Control

We have seen how to make a robot manipulator track a desired joint space
trajectory qd(t). However, in any practical application the desired trajectories
of a robot arm are given in the workspace or Cartesian coordinates. An important
series of papers dealt with resolved motion manipulator control [Whitney 1969];
[Luh et al. 1980], [Wu and Paul 1982]. There the joint motions were resolved
into the Cartesian coordinates, where the control objectives are specified. The
result is that an operator can use a joystick to specify Cartesian motion (e.g.,
for a prosthetic device), with the arm following the specified motion. Older
teleoperator devices used joysticks that directly controlled the motion of the
actuators, resulting in long training times and very awkward manipulability.
   There are several approaches to Cartesian robot control. For instance, one
might:

1. Use the Cartesian dynamics in Section 3.5 for controls design (see the
   Problems).
2. Convert the desired Cartesian trajectory yd(t) to a joint-space trajectory
   qd(t) using the inverse kinematics. Then use the joint-space computed-
   torque control schemes in Table 4.4.1.
3. Use Cartesian computed-torque control.

Let us discuss the last of these.


Cartesian Computed-Torque Control
This approach begins with the joint space dynamics
                                                                         (4.7.1)

In Section 3.4 we discussed a general feedback-linearization approach for
linearizing the arm dynamics with respect to a general output. In this section
the output we are interested in is the Cartesian error

                                                                         (4.7.2)

with yd(t) the desired Cartesian trajectory and y(t) the end-effector Cartesian
position.
   The problems associated with specifying the Cartesian position of the end
effector are covered in Appendix A. There we see that y(t) is not necessarily a
6-vector, but could in fact be the 4×4 arm T matrix. Then yd(t) is a 4×4 matrix
given by


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.7 Cartesian Control                                                         249


                                                                          (4.7.3)

containing the desired orientation (nd(t), od(t), ad(t)) and position pd(t) of the
end effector with respect to base coordinates. On the other hand, y(t) could be
specified (nonuniquely) using Euler angles as a 6-vector, or using quaternions
as a 7-vector, or using the encoded tool configuration vector which gives y(t)
 R6.
   Although there are problems with specifying y(t) as a 6-vector, the
Cartesian error is easily specified (see the next subsection) as the 6-vector

                                                                          (4.7.4)

with ep(t) the position error and eo(t) the orientation error. Thus equation
(4.7.2) is generally valid only as a loose notational convenience.
   Let us assume that
                                                                          (4.7.5)

with h(q) the transformation from q(t) to y(t), which is a modification of the
kinematics transformation, depending on the form decided on for y(t). Then
the associated Jacobian is J=¶h/¶q and
                                                                          (4.7.6)

Now, the approach of Section 3.4, or a small modification of the derivation
in Section 4.4, shows that the computed-torque control relative to ey(t) is
given by

                                                                          (4.7.7)

which results in the error system
                                                                          (4.7.8)

with the disturbance

                                                                          (4.7.9)

We call (4.7.7) the Cartesian computed-torque control law.
   The outer-loop control u(t) may be selected using any of the
techniques already mentioned for joint-space computed-torque control (see
Table 4.4.1). For PD control, for instance, the complete control law is




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
250                                                   Computed-Torque Control


                                                                          (4.7.10)

A disadvantage with Cartesian computed-torque control is the necessity to
compute the inverse Jacobian. To avoid inverting the Jacobian at each sample
period, we might propose the approximate Cartesian computedtorque controller

                                                                          (4.7.11)

where and are approximations to MJ-1 and N, respectively. The error
system for this control law is not difficult to compute (cf. the joint space
approximation in Table 4.4.1 and see the Problems).
   A PD outer feedback loop yields
                                                                          (4.7.12)

A special case of this control law is obtained by setting                      =I,
 =               which yields the Cartesian PD-gravity controller


                                                                          (4.7.13)

The robustness properties of computed-torque control make this a successful
control law for many applications.
   Simulations like those presented in this section could be carried out for
Cartesian computed-torque control. The basic principles would be the same
as for joint space computed-torque control (see the Problems).

Cartesian Error Computation
The actual Cartesian position may be computed from the measured joint
variables using the arm kinematics in terms of the arm T matrix

                                                                          (4.7.14)

and the desired Cartesian position may likewise be expressed as (4.7.3). Then
a Cartesian position error and velocity error suitable for computedtorque
control may be computed as follows [Luh et al. 1980], [Wu and Paul 1982].
Define

                                                                          (4.7.15)

with v(t), vd(t) the actual and desired linear velocity, and ω(t), ωd(t) the actual
and desired angular velocities. Then



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4.8 Summary                                                                    251

                                                                           (4.7.16)

is easy to compute, since (t) may be determined from the measured joint
variables using (4.7.6).
   The linear position error is simply given by
                                                                           (4.7.17)

An orientation error eo(t) suitable for feedback purposes is more difficult to
obtain, but may be defined as follows.
   Denote the rotation transformation portions of (4.7.14) and (4.7.3),
respectively, as R(t), Rd(t). The orientation error can be expressed in terms of
a rotation of φ(t) rads about an Euler axis of k(t) that takes R(t) into Rd(t)
(Appendix A). In fact, one may define the 3-vector

                                                                           (4.7.18)

where eo(t) may be assumed small. With this definition, it can be shown that
eo(t) is found from T(t) and Td(t) using

                                                                           (4.7.19)

The overall Cartesian error is now given by (4.7.4). Unfortunately, with this
definition of eo, it happens that ey is not the derivative of ey; however, the
control law (4.7.10) still yields suitable results. Alternative definitions of ey(t)
and y(t) are given in [Wu and Paul 1982]; they are closely tied to the cross-
product matrix O, in Appendix A and require the selection of a sampling
period T.


4.8 Summary

In this chapter we showed how to generate smooth trajectories defining robot
end-effector motion that passes through a set of specified points. Then we
covered the important class of computed-torque controllers, which subsumes
many types of robot control algorithms. Both classical and modern control
algorithms are described by this class, so that computed torque provides a
bridge between older and more modern algorithms for motion control.
   As special types of computed-torque algorithms, we mentioned PD control,
PID control, PD-plus-gravity, classical joint control, and digital control. Most
robot control algorithms are implemented digitally, and computedtorque
provides a rigorous framework for analyzing the effects of digitization and
the size of the sampling period. This is approached by considering digital



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
252                                             Computed-Torque Control

control as an approximate computed-torque law and studying the error system
(cf. subsequent chapters).
   We showed some aspects of modern linear quadratic outer-loop design,
and concluded with a discussion of Cartesian control.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
                                                                                253




REFERENCES
[Arimoto and Miyazaki 1984] Arimoto, S., and F Miyazaki, “Stability and robustness
     of PID feedback control for robot manipulators of sensory capability,” Proc.
     First Int. Symp., pp. 783–799, MIT, 1984.

[Åström and Wittenmark 1984] Åström, K.J., and B.Wittenmark, Computer
      Controlled Systems. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1984.

[Bobrow et al. 1983] Bobrow, J.E., S.Dubowsky, and J.S.Gibson, “On the optimal
     control of robotic manipulators with actuator constraints,” Proc. Am. Control
     Conf, pp. 782–787, June 1983.

[Chen 1989] Chen, Y.-C., “On the structure of the time-optimal controls for robotic
     manipulators,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 115–116,
     Jan. 1989.

[Dawson 1990] Dawson, D.M., “Uncertainties in the control of robot manipulators,”
     Ph.D. thesis, School of Electrical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
     Mar. 1990.

[Elliott 1990] Elliott, D.L., “Discrete-time systems on manifolds,” Proc. IEEE Conf
       Decision Control, pp. 1908–1909, Dec. 1990.

[Franklin et al. 1986] Franklin, G.F:, J.D.Powell, and A.Emami-Naeini, Feedback
      Control of Dynamic Systems. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1986.

[Geering 1986] Geering, H.P., L.Guzzella, S.A.R.Hepner, and C.H. Onder, “Time-
      optimal motions of robots in assembly tasks,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control,
      vol. AC-31, no. 6, pp. 512–518, June 1986.

[Gilbert and Ha 1984] Gilbert, E.G., and I.J.Ha, “An approach to nonlinear feedback
      control with applications to robotics,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern., vol.
      SMC-14, no. 6, pp. s 879–884, Nov./Dec. 1984.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
254                                                                     REFERENCES

[Gourdeau and Schwartz 1989] Gourdeau, R., and H.M.Schwartz, “Optimal control
     of a robot manipulator using a weighted time-energy cost function,” Proc.
     IEEE Conf. Decision Control, pp. 1628–1631, Dec. 1989.

[Hunt et al. 1983] Hunt, L.R., R.Su, and G.Meyer, “Global transformations of
     nonlinear systems,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. AC-28, no. 1, pp. 24–
     31, Jan. 1983.

[IMSL] IMSL, Library Contents Document, 8th ed. Houston, TX: International
     Mathematical and Statistical Libraries.

[Jayasuriya and Suh 1985] Jayasuriya, S., and M.-S.Suh, “Sub-optimal control
      strategies for manipulators with actuator constraints: the near minimum-time
      problem,” Proc. Am. Control Conf., pp. 61–62, June 1985.

[Johansson 1990] Johansson, R., “Quadratic optimization of motion coordination
      and control,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 1197–1208,
      Nov. 1990.

[Kahn and Roth 1971] Kahn, M.E., and B.Roth, “The near-minimum-time control of
     open-loop articulated kinematic chains,” Trans. ASMEJ. Dyn. Syst. Meas.
     Control, pp. 164–172, Sept. 1971.

[Kailath 1980] Kailath, T. Linear Systems. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1980.

[Kim and Shin 1985] Kim, B.K., and K.G.Shin, “Suboptimal control of industrial
     manipulators with a weighted minimum time-fuel criterion,” IEEE Trans.
     Autom. Control, vol. AC30, no. 1, pp. 1–10, Jan. 1985.

[LaSalle and Lefschetz 1961] LaSalle, J., and S.Lefschetz, Stability by Liapunov’s Direct
      Method. New York: Academic Press, 1961.

[Lee et al. 1983] Lee, C.S.G., and M.H.Chen, “A suboptimal control design for
      mechanical manipulators,” Proc. Am. Control Conf., pp. 1056–1061, June
      1983.

[Lewis 1986a] Lewis, F.L., Optimal Control. New York: Wiley, 1986 (a).

[Lewis 1986b] Lewis, F.L., Optimal Estimation. New York: Wiley, 1986 (b).

[Lewis 1992] Lewis, F.L., Applied Optimal Control and Estimation. Englewood Cliffs,
      NJ: Prentice Hall, 1992.

[LINPACK] LINPACK, User’s Guide, J.J.Dongarra, C.B.Moler, J.R. Bunch, and
     G.W.Stewart. Philadelphia: SIAM Press, 1979.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES                                                                      255

[Lowe and Lewis 1991] Lowe, J.A., and F.L.Lewis, “Digital signal processor
     implementation of a Kalman filter for disk drive head-positioning mechanism,”
     in Microprocessors in Robotic and Manufacturing Systems, S.Tzafestas ed.,
     pp. 369–383, 1991.

[Luh et al. 1980] Luh, J.Y.S., M.W.Walker, and R.P.C.Paul, “Resolved-acceleration
      control of mechanical manipulators,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. AC-
      25, no. 3, pp. 195–200, June 1980.

[Luo and Saridis 1985] Luo, G.L., and G.N.Saridis, “L-Q design of PID controllers
      for robot arms,” IEEE J. Robot. Autom., vol. RA-1, no. 3, pp. 152–159, Sept.
      1985.

[Luo et al. 1986] Luo, G.L., G.N.Saridis, and C.Z.Wang, “A dual-mode control for
      robotic manipulators,” Proc. IEEE Conf. Decision Control, pp. 409–414,
      Dec. 1986.

[MATRIXx 1989] MATRIXX, Santa Clara, CA: Integrated Systems, Inc., 1989.

[Moler 1987] Moler, C., J.Little, and S.Bangert, PC-Matlab. Sherborn, MA: The
     Mathworks, 1987.

[Neuman and Tourassis 1985] Neuman, C.P., and V.D.Tourassis, “Discrete dynamic
     robot models,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man and Cybern., vol. SMC-15, no. 2, pp.
     193–204, Mar./Apr. 1985.

[Paul 1981] Paul, R.P., Robot Manipulators. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1981.

[Schilling 1990] Schilling, R.J., Fundamentals of Robotics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
       Prentice Hall, 1990.

[Shin and McKay 1985] Shin, K.G., and N.D.McKay, “Minimum-time control of
      robotic manipulators with geometric path constraints,” IEEE Trans. Autom.
      Control, vol. AC-30, no. 6, pp. 531–541, June 1985.

[Slotine and Li 1991] Slotine, J.-J.E, and W.Li, Applied Nonlinear Control. Englewood
       Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1991.

[Vukobratovic and Stokic 1983] Vukobratovic and Stokic, “Contribution to the
     suboptimal control of manipulation robots,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control,
     vol. AC-28, no. 10, pp. 981–985, Oct. 1983.

[Whitney 1969] Whitney, D.E., “Resolved motion rate control of manipulators and
     human prostheses,” IEEE Trans. Man Machine Syst., vol. MMS-10, no. 2, pp.
     47–53, June 1969.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
256                                                             REFERENCES

[Wu and Paul 1982] Wu, C.-H., and R.P.Paul, “Resolved motion force control of
     robot manipulator,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern., vol. SMC-12, no. 3, pp.
     266–275, June 1982.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES                                                                              257


PROBLEMS
Section 4.2
4.2–1 Minimum-Time Control. Derive the minimum-time control switching time ts
         [cf. (4.2.11)] when the initial and final velocities are not zero.
4.2–2       Polynomial Path Interpolation. It is desired to move a single joint from q(0)=0,
             (0)=0 through the point q(l)=5, (l)=40 to a final position/velocity of (2)=10,
            Determine the cubic interpolating polynomials required in this two-interval
            path. Plot the path generated and verify that it meets the specified requirements
            on q(t) and (t) Plot (t) versus q(t).

4.2–3       LFPB. Repeat Problem 4.2–2 using LFPB.

4.2–4       Polynomial Path for Acceleration Matching. Derive the interpolating
            polynomial required to match positions, velocities, and accelerations at the
            via points.

Section 4.3

4.3–1       Simulation of Flexible Coupling System. Use computer simulation to reproduce
            the results for the motor with flexible coupling shaft in Example 3.6.1.

4.3–2       Simulation of Nonlinear System. The Van der Pol oscillator is a nonlinear
            system with some interesting properties. The state equation is




            Simulate the dynamics for initial conditions of x1(0)=0.1, x2(0)= 0.1. Use
            values for the parameter of α=0.1 and then α=0.8. Plot x1(t) and x2(t), as well
            as x2(t) vs. x1(t) in the phase plane. For each simulation you should clearly see
            the limit cycle that is characteristic of the Van der Pol oscillator.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
258                                                                      REFERENCES

Section 4.4
4.4–1 Prove (4.4.32).
4.4–2       PD Computed-Torque Simulation. Repeat Example 4.4.1 using various values
            for the PD gains. Try both critical damping and underdamping to examine
            the effects of overshoot on the joint trajectories.
4.4–3       Classical Joint Control. Prove (4.4.55), (4.4.57), (4.4.60), and (4.4.62). See
            [Franklin et al. 1986].
4.4–4       PD Computed Torque with Payload Uncertainty. The CT controller is
            inherently robust. In Example 4.4.1, suppose that m2 changes from 1 kg to 2
            kg at t=5 s, corresponding to a payload mass being picked up. The CT
            controller, however, still uses a value of m2=1. Use simulation to plot the
            error time history. Does the performance improve with larger PD gains?
4.4–5       PID Computed Torque with Payload Uncertainty. Repeat Problem 4.4–4
            using a PID outer loop. Does the integral term help in rejecting the mass
            uncertainty?
4.4–6       PD Computed Torque with Friction Uncertainty. Repeat Problem 4.4–4
            assuming now that m2=1 kg stays constant and is known to the controller.
            However, add friction of the form F(q, ) = Fv +Kdsgn( )(see Table 3.3.1) to
            the arm dynamics, but not to the CT controller. Use vi=0.1, ki=0.1. Simulate
            the performance for different PD gains.
4.4–7       PID Computed Torque with Friction Uncertainty. Repeat Problem 4.4–6
            using a PID outer loop.
4.4–8       PD Computed Torque with Actuator Dynamics
            (a) Design a CT control law for the two-link planar elbow arm with actuator
                dynamics (Section 3.6) of the form



            Take the link masses and lengths as 1 kg, 1 m. Take motor parameters
            of J m =0.1 kg-m 2 , b m=0.2 N-m/rad/s, and R=5Ω, Set the gear ratio




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES                                                                        259

            r=0.1.
            (b) Simulate the controller for various values of PD gains.
4.4–9       PD Computed Torque with Neglected Actuator Dynamics. Consider the
            arm-plus-dynamics in Problem 4.4–8. Suppose, however, that the CT
            controller was designed using only the arm dynamics and neglecting the
            actuator dynamics. Use the PD gains in Example 4.4.1. Simulate the control
            law on the arm-plus-dynamics for various values of gear ratio r. As r
            decreases, the performance should deteriorate.
4.4–10 PD Computed Torque Using Only Actuator Dynamics. Consider the arm-
       plus-dynamics in Problem 4.4–8. Design a CT controller using only the
       actuator dynamics and no arm dynamics. Simulate the control law on the
       arm-plus-dynamics for various values of gear ratio r. As r decreases, the
       performance should improve. For fixed r, it is also instructive to try different
       PD gains.
4.4–11 Classical Joint Control with Actuator Dynamics. Repeat Example 4.4.4
       including actuator dynamics like those in Problem 4.4–8. Try different values
       of gear ratio r. Compare to Problem 4.4–10.
4.4–12 PD Computed Torque with Flexible Coupling. Combine the flexible shaft in
       Example 3.6.1 with the two-link arm in Example 4.4.1 to study the effects of
       using CT control on a robot with compliant motor coupling. Try different
       values of the coupling shaft parameters.
4.4–13 Error Dynamics with Approximate CT Control. Considzer the two-link
       polar arm in Example 3.2.1 with friction of the form Find the error
       dynamics (4.4.44) for the cases:
       (a) Friction is not included in the CT control law.
       (b) Payload mass m2 is not exactly known in the CT control law.
       (c) PD-gravity CT is used.
       (d) PD classical joint control is used with no nonlinear terms.
Section 4.5
4.5–1       Digital Control Simulation
            (a) Repeat Example 4.5.1 using a desired trajectory with period of 1




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
260                                                                          REFERENCES

                s instead of 2 s. Plot as well the Cartesian position (x2(t), y2(t)) of the end
                effector in base coordinates.
            (b) Redo the simulation deleting the lines in Figure 4.5.7 that zero the initial
                velocity estimates.
            (c) Try to simulate the digital CT controller using the alternative technique
                to compute k from and vk, as given in equation (1) in the example.

4.5–2       Digital Control Simulation. Convert the PD-gravity CT controller in Example
            4.4.3 to a digital controller. Try several sample periods.
4.5–3       Error Dynamics for Digital Control. Find the error system in Table 4.4.1
            using digital control of the form (4.5.3).
4.5–4       Antiwindup Protection. In Example 4.4.4 we saw the deleterious effects in
            robot control of integrator windup due to actuator saturation. In Example
            4.5.2 we showed how to implement antiwindup protection on a simple PI
            controller. Implement antiwindup protection on the robot controller in
            Example 4.4.4. The issue is determining the limits on the integrator outputs
            given the motor torque limits. Successful and thorough completion of this
            problem might lead to a nice conference paper.
Section 4.6
4.6–1 Optimal LQ Outer-Loop PD Gains. Verify (4.6.15). To do this, select the
         Riccati solution matrix as




            with Pi  Rn Substitute P, A, B, Q, R into the Riccati equation (4.6.6). You will
            obtain three n×n equations that can be solved for Pi. Now use (4.6.5).
4.6–2       Robust Control Using LQ Outer-Loop Design. Redo the PDgravity simulation
            in Example 4.4.3 using PD gains found from LQ design. Does the LQ
            robustness property improve the responses found in Example 4.4.3 using
            nonoptimal gains? Try various choices for Qp, Qv, and R, both diagonal and
            nondiagonal.
Section 4.7
4.7–1       Direct Cartesian Computed-Torque Design. Begin with the Cartesian
            dynamics in Section 3.5 and design a computed-torque controller. Compare
            it to (4.7.10).
4.7–2       Approximate Cartesian Computed-Torque. Derive the error system dynamics
            associated with the approximate control law (4.7.11).
4.7–3       Cartesian PD-Plus-Gravity Control. Repeat Example 4.4.3 using Cartesian
            computed-torque control, where the trajectory is given in workspace
            coordinates.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
