Chapter 9

Force Control
In this chapter the fundamentals of position/force controllers are studied.
The topics that are covered include stiffness control, hybrid position/force
control, hybrid impedance control, and reduced-state position/force control.
Emphasis is placed on controller development, stability, and implementation
issues.


9.1 Introduction

For tasks performed by robot manipulators, such as moving payloads or
painting objects, position controllers give adequate performance because
these types of tasks only require the robot to follow a desired trajectory.
However, during grinding or an assembly task, the robot manipulator comes
in contact with the environment; therefore, interaction forces develop
between the robot manipulator and the environment. Consequently, these
interaction forces, as well as the position of the end effector, must be
controlled.
   To motivate the need for using a combination of force and position control,
consider the problem of controlling a manipulator to write a sentence on a
blackboard. To form the letters in the sentence, we must certainly control
the end-effector position or, equivalently, the position of the chalk. As anyone
who has written on a blackboard knows, the force with which one presses
on the blackboard must also be controlled. That is, pressing too lightly can
result in letters that are not easily readable, while pressing too hard can
result in broken chalk. This example clearly illustrates that many robotic
applications will require that a desired positional trajectory and a desired
force trajectory must be specified. In this chapter we present some general

                                                                            463
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
464                                                              Force Control

control strategies that control not only the robot end-effector position but
also the force that the end effector exerts on the environment. It should be
noted that throughout this chapter, we assume that the desired velocity and
force trajectories, which are commanded by the controllers, are consistent
with the model of the environment [Lipkin and Duffy 1988]. If this is not the
case, it may be possible to modify the desired velocity and force trajectories
to be consistent with the model of the environment. The interested reader is
referred to [Lipkin and Duffy 1988] for information on this modifying or
“kinestatic filtering” of the desired trajectories.


9.2 Stiffness Control

Since the first robot manipulators involved in industrial processes were
required to perform positional tasks (e.g., spray painting), robot manipulators
were manufactured to be very rigid. This rigid design allowed the robot
control designer to obtain reasonable positional accuracy by utilizing simple
control laws. As one might expect, force control applications (e.g., grinding
or sanding) are extremely difficult to accomplish with such a “stiff” robot.
Therefore, if the robot manipulator “stiffness” could be controlled, force
control applications could be accomplished more easily. In this section the
concept of stiffness control is formulated for a simple single-degree-of-freedom
example. The robot manipulator equation is then modified to account for
the forces exerted on the environment. Using this new model, the stiffness
control concept [Salisbury and Craig 1980] is then generalized to an n-link
robot manipulator.


Stiffness Control of a Single-Degree-of-Freedom Manipulator
To motivate the concept of stiffness control, consider the problem of force
control for the system depicted by Figure 9.2.1. Here the manipulator with
mass m is assumed to be in contact with the environment, which is located
at the static position xe. The control problem is to specify an input force
(i.e.,␶) so that the manipulator moves to a desired constant position (i.e.,
xd). In this system, we also assume that if the position of the manipulator
(i.e., x) is greater than xe, the force (i.e., f) exerted on the environment is
given by


                                          f=ke(x-xe),                   (9.2.1)


where ke is a positive constant used to denote the environmental stiffness.
That is, we are assuming that the environmental stiffness can be modeled as
a linear spring with a spring constant denoted by ke. From this assumption


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.2 Stiffness Control                                                          465

we can visualize the single-degree-of-freedom system as the mass-spring
diagram given by Figure 9.2.2.




                           Figure 9.2.1: Single-degree-of-freedom system.




                                    Figure 9.2.2: Mass-spring diagram.


   Assuming that gravity and friction are negligible, the equation of motion
for the system given in Figure 9.2.2 is given by

                                                                            (9.2.2)

The system block diagram for (9.2.2) is given by Figure 9.2.3. Note that in
Figure 9.2.3, we have used the variable s to denote the Laplace transform
variable.
   The form of the dynamics given by (9.2.2) motivates the simple PD control
law

                                                                            (9.2.3)

where kv and kp are positive scalar control gains. After substituting (9.2.3)
into (9.2.2), we obtain the closed-loop system

                                                                            (9.2.4)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
466                                                                         Force Control




                                   Figure 9.2.3: System block diagram.




                          Figure 9.2.4: Closed-loop system block diagram.


which can be represented by the block diagram given by Figure 9.2.4. From
Figure 9.2.4 we know that the closed-loop system is stable since we have
defined the constants m, kv, kp, and ke to be positive. That is, we can show
that the poles of the transfer function




are in the open left-half s-plane.
   To investigate how the PD control given in (9.2.3) controls the force exerted
on the environment, we examine the system in steady-state conditions. Because
xd and xe are constant, the Laplace transform of x can be found from (9.2.4)
to be


                                                                                  (9.2.5)


Therefore, the steady-state manipulator position (i.e.,) can easily be shown
to be


                                                                                  (9.2.6)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.2 Stiffness Control                                                        467

The steady-state manipulator position can now be used to calculate the steady-
state force (i.e., f) exerted on the environment. Specifically, upon substituting
(9.2.6) into (9.2.1), the steady-state force is given by


                                                                         (9.2.7)


As one would expect, the spring constant of the environment is often
considered to be large because the robot is pushing on a nearly rigid surface
in most robot force control applications. Thus, if we assume that         we
can approximate the steady-state force in (9.2.7) as

                                                                         (9.2.8)

From the discussion above, we can see that the position control strategy
given by (9.2.3) does indeed exert a force on the environment. Specifically,
this force is created by commanding a desired trajectory that is slightly inside
the contact surface. In attempting to eliminate the position error, the position
controller exerts a steady-state force on the surface. From the approximate
steady-state force given by (9.2.8), the position gain (i.e., kp) can be thought
of as representing the desired “stiffness” of the manipulator. That is, the
manipulator can be visualized as a spring, with spring constant kp, exerting
a force on the environment. Hence the term “stiffness control” has often
been associated with the PD control given by (9.2.3) since the stiffness of the
manipulator can be set by the adjustment of kp.


The Jacobian Matrix and Environmental Forces
Before the stiffness controller can be generalized to an n-link robot
manipulator, we must define some notation with regard to the forces that
the robot exerts on the environment. As explained in [Spong and Vidyasagar
1989], the forces are commonly transformed into the joint-space via a
Jacobian matrix. In this chapter we define the Jacobian matrix in terms of a
task space coordinate system which is defined for the specific robot application
in question. That is, for a certain application, we may wish to have the end
effector apply forces along a particular set of directions while moving along
other directions. This concept is illustrated in Figure 9.2.5, which depicts a
manipulator moving along a slanted surface. The task space coordinate system
is given by the directions u and v since we wish to move the end effector
along the surface in the direction v while applying a force normal to the
surface along the direction u. An appropriate task space coordinate system
is usually defined in most robotic applications from this line of reasoning.
   Following this logic, let x be the n×1 task space vector defined by


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
468                                                                      Force Control

                                                                               (9.2.9)


where h(q) is found from the manipulator kinematics and the appropriate
relationships between the joint and task spaces. The derivative of x is defined
as

                                                                              (9.2.10)

where the n×n task space Jacobian matrix J(q) [Spong and Vidyasagar 1989]
is defined as


                                                                              (9.2.11)




                    Figure 9.2.5: Manipulator moving along slanted surface.


with the identity matrix I, the zero matrix 0, and the transformation matrix
T having dimensions dependent on the task space coordinate system selected.
The transformation matrix T is typically used when converting joint velocities
to the derivatives of the roll, pitch, and yaw angles associated with end-
effector orientation. For brevity we assume that the robot manipulators
discussed in this chapter are nonredundant and are always in a nonsingular
configuration; therefore, the Jacobian matrix is a nonsingular square matrix.
   Using the task space coordinate concept, we now examine how the robot
equation must be modified for the purposes of force control. If the end effector
of the manipulator is in contact with the environment, force interactions


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.2 Stiffness Control                                                      469

will exist between the end effector and the environment. If the interaction
forces are measured in the joint space, the manipulator dynamic equation
can be written as

                                                                      (9.2.12)

where ␶e is an n×1 vector in joint space coordinates, which denotes the force
exerted on the environment. The dynamic equation given by (9.2.12) makes
sense because if the manipulator is not moving (i.e.,         ), then (9.2.12)
reduces to

                                                                      (9.2.13)

That is, if the robot manipulator is in static operation, the actuator force is
equal to the force exerted on the environment plus the force needed to
withstand the gravitational forces. Note that in (9.2.13), we have assumed
that static friction can be neglected.
   A joint space representation for the force exerted on the environment is
not the standard notation in the robotics literature; rather, the robot
manipulator equation is usually given by

                                                                      (9.2.14)

where f is the n×1 vector of contact forces and torques in task space.
  To understand the origin of (9.2.14), equate the right-hand sides of (9.2.12)
and (9.2.14) to yield

                                                                      (9.2.15)

This equation can be shown to be true quite easily by using a conservation
of energy argument. Specifically, by conservation of energy, we know that

                                                                      (9.2.16)

Substituting (9.2.10) into (9.2.16) yields




Since the relationship above must hold for all q, we can see that (9.2.15)
obviously represents a true statement. To shed some light on the process of
developing the Jacobian and the task space formulation, two examples are
now discussed.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
470                                                              Force Control

EXAMPLE 9.2–1: Task Space Formulation for a Slanted Surface
    We want to find the manipulator dynamics for the Cartesian manipulator
    system (i.e., both joints are prismatic) given in Figure 9.2.5 and to
    decompose the forces exerted on the surface into a normal force and a
    tangent force. First, the motion portion of the dynamics can easily be
    determined when the robot is not constrained by the surface. After
    removing the surface and the interaction forces f1, and f2, the manipulator
    dynamics can be shown to be

                                                                             (1)

    where




    and F(q) is the 2×1 vector                      that models the friction as
    discussed in Chapter 2.
       To account for the interaction forces, let x be the 2×1 task space vector
    defined by


                                                                             (2)


    where u and v define a fixed coordinate system such that u represents the
    normal distance to the surface, and v represents the tangent distance along
    the surface. As in (9.2.9), the task space coordinates can be expressed in
    terms of the joint space coordinates by


                                                                             (3)


    where h(q) is found from the geometry of the problem to be


                                                                             (4)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.2 Stiffness Control                                                          471

    The task space Jacobian matrix is found from (9.2.11) by utilizing the
    fact that T is the identity matrix for this problem because we do not have
    to concern ourselves with any end-effector angles of orientation. That is,
    J(q) is given as


                                                                               (5)


    Following (9.2.14), the robot manipulator equation is given by

                                                                               (6)

    where




    It is important to realize that the normal force (i.e., f1) and the tangent
    force (i.e., f2) are drawn in the direction of the task space coordinate system
    given by (2) (see Fig. 9.2.5).
                                                                                䊏


EXAMPLE 9.2–2: Task Space Formulation for an Elliptical Surface
    We wish to find the manipulator dynamics for the Cartesian
    manipulator system given in Figure 9.2.6 and to decompose the forces
    exerted on the surface into a normal force and a tangent force. The
    motion portion of the dynamics is the same as in Example 9.2.1;
    however, due to the change in the environmental surface, a new task
    space coordinate system must be defined. Specifically, let x be the 2×1
    task space vector defined by


                                                                               (1)


    where u and v define a rotating coordinate system such that u represents
    the normal distance to the surface and v represents the tangent distance
    along the surface. As in (9.2.9), the task space coordinates can be expressed
    in terms of the joint space coordinates by


                                                                               (2)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
472                                                                       Force Control




                   Figure 9.2.6: Manipulator moving along elliptical surface.




    where h(q) is found to be


                                                                                    (3)


with u, v, q1 and q2 being appropriately defined unit vectors used in the dot
product notation given in (3). The unit vectors q1 and q2 are defined in terms
of the fixed coordinate set given by q1 and q2. These unit vectors are defined
as


                                                                                    (4)


To find the unit vectors u and v, we first use the function of the surface

                                                                                    (5)

to parameterize the surface in terms of one variable (i.e., q2) as follows:


                                                                                    (6)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.2 Stiffness Control                                                        473

The partial derivative of (6) with respect to q2 divided by the length of the
vector yields a unit vector (i.e., v) that is always tangent to the surface. That
is, v is given by


                                                                             (7)


where




By using (5) again, the expression for v can be simplified to yield


                                                                             (8)


where




Because the vectors u and v must be orthogonal (i.e., u.v=0), via (8) and the
geometry of the problem, we know that


                                                                             (9)


Substituting (4), (8), and (9) into (3) yields


                                                                            (10)


The task space Jacobian matrix is found from (9.2.11) by utilizing the fact
that T is the identity matrix. That is, J(q) is given as


                                                                            (11)


where



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
474                                                                Force Control




Following (9.2.14), the robot manipulator equation is given by

                                                                             (12)

where ␶, M, q, G, f, and F(q) are as defined in Example 9.2.1. It is important
to note that the normal force (i.e., f1) and the tangent force (i.e., f2) are
drawn in the direction of the task space coordinate system given by (1) (see
Fig. 9.2.6).


Stiffness Control of an N-Link Manipulator
Now that we have the robot manipulator dynamics in a form which includes
the environmental interaction forces, the stiffness controller for the n-link
robot manipulator can be formulated. As before, the force exerted on the
environment is defined as


                                                                         (9.2.17)


where Ke is an n×n diagonal, positive semi-definite, constant matrix used to
denote the environmental stiffness, and xe is an n×1 vector measured in task
space that is used to denote the static location of the environment. Note that
if the manipulator is not constrained in a particular task space direction, the
corresponding diagonal element of the matrix Ke is assumed to be zero. Also,
the environmental surface friction is typically neglected in the stiffness control
formulation.
    The multidimensional stiffness controller is the PD-type controller

                                                                         (9.2.18)

where Kv and Kp are n×n diagonal, constant, positive-definite matrices and
the task space tracking error is defined as




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.2 Stiffness Control                                                      475

As before, xd is used to denote the desired constant end-effector position
that we wish to move the robot manipulator to; however, xd is now an n×1
vector. Substituting (9.2.17) and (9.2.18) into (9.2.14) yields the closed-loop
dynamics

                                                                      (9.2.19)

To analyze the stability of the system given by (9.2.19), we utilize the
Lyapunov-like function

                                                                      (9.2.20)

Differentiating (9.2.20) with respect to time and utilizing (9.2.10) yields


                                                                      (9.2.21)


Note that in (9.2.21) we have used the fact that xe and xd are constant and
that the transpose of either a scalar function or a diagonal matrix is equal to
that function or matrix, respectively. Substituting (9.2.19) into (9.2.21) and
utilizing (9.2.10) yields

                                                                      (9.2.22)


Applying the skew-symmetric property (see Chapter 2) to (9.2.22) yields

                                                                      (9.2.23)

which is nonpositive. Since the matrices J(q) and hence JT(q)KvJ(q) are
nonsingular, V can only remain zero along trajectories where q=0 and hence
q=0 (see LaSalle’s theorem in Chapter 1). Substituting q=0 and q=0 into
(9.2.19) and utilizing (9.2.10) yields

                                                                      (9.2.24)

or, equivalently,
                                                                      (9.2.25)

where the subscript i is used to denote the ith component of the vectors x, xd,
xe, and the ith diagonal element of the matrices Kp and Ke.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
476                                                                       Force Control

    The stability analysis above can be interpreted to mean that the robot
manipulator will stop moving when the task space coordinates are given by
(9.2.25). That is, the final position or steady-state position of the end effector
is given by (9.2.25), which in the single-degree-of-freedom case is equivalently
given by (9.2.6). To obtain the ith component of the steady-state force exerted
on the environment, we substitute (9.2.25) into the ith component of (9.2.17)
to yield

                                                                               (9.2.26)


Thus the steady-state force exerted by the end effector on the environment
is given by (9.2.26), which in the single-degree-of-freedom case is
equivalently given by (9.2.7). As in the single-degree-of-freedom case, we
assume that Kei is much larger than Kpi for the task space directions that
are to be force controlled. That is, the steady-state force in (9.2.26) can be
approximated by




                                      Table 9.2.1: Stiffness Controller




                                                                               (9.2.27)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.2 Stiffness Control                                                       477

therefore, Kpi can interpreted as specifying the stiffness of the manipulator in
these task space directions.
   If the manipulator is not constrained in a task space direction, the
corresponding stiffness constant Kei is equal to zero. Substituting Kei=0 into
(9.2.25) yields

                                                                       (9.2.28)

This means that for the nonconstrained task space directions, we obtain set-
point control; therefore, in steady state the desired position set point is
reached. The stiffness controller along with the corresponding stability result
are both summarized in Table 9.2.1. We now illustrate the concept of stiffness
control with an example.

EXAMPLE 9.2–3: Stiffness Controller for a Cartesian Manipulator
We want to design and simulate a stiffness controller for the robot
manipulator system given in Figure 9.2.5. The control objective is to move
the end effector to a desired final position of vd=3 m while exerting a final
desired normal force of fd1=2 N. We neglect the surface friction (i.e., f2) and
joint friction, and assume that the normal force (i.e., f1) satisfies the
relationship


                                                                            (1)


where                  and ke=1000 N/m. The robot link masses are assumed
to be unity, and the initial end-effector position is given by

                                                                            (2)


To accomplish the control objective, the stiffness controller from Table 9.2.1
is given by

                                                                            (3)

where




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
478                                                                            Force Control

␶, J, G, and x are as defined in Example 9.2.1, ud is defined as the desired
normal position, and the gain matrices Kv and Kp have been taken to be
Kv=kvI and Kp=kpI. For this example we select kv= kp=10, which will
guarantee that kp<<ke as required in the stiffness control formulation. To
satisfy the control objective that fd1=2 N, we utilize (9.2.27) to determine
the desired normal position. Specifically, substituting the values of fd1, ke,
and ue into


                                                                                         (4)


yields
   The simulation of the stiffness controller given by (3) for the robot
manipulator system (Figure 9.2.5) is given in Figure 9.2.7. As indicated by
the simulation, the desired tangential position and normal force are reached
in about 4 s.
                                                                          䊏




                           Figure 9.2.7: Simulation of stiffness controller.




9.3 Hybrid Position/Force Control

A major disadvantage of the stiffness controller given in Section 9.2 is that it
can only be used for set-point control; in other words, the desired end effector
manipulator position and the desired force exerted on the environment must
be constant. In many robotic applications, such as grinding, the end effector
must track a desired positional trajectory along the object surface while


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.3 Hybrid Position/Force Control                                              479

tracking a desired force trajectory exerted onto the object surface. In this
type of application, a stiffness controller will not perform adequately;
therefore, another control approach must be utilized.
   The so-called hybrid position/force controller [Chae et al. 1988] and
[Raibert and Craig 1981] can be used for tracking position and force
trajectories simultaneously. The basic concept of the hybrid position/force
controller is to decouple the position and force control problems into subtasks
via a task space formulation. As we have seen, the task space formulation is
valuable in determining which directions should be force or position
controlled. That is, the position and force control subtasks are easily
determined from the task space formulation. After the control subtasks have
been identified, separate position and force controllers can then be developed.


Hybrid Position/Force Control of a Cartesian Two-Link Arm
To illustrate this concept of hybrid position/force control, consider the robot
manipulator system given by Figure 9.3.1. For this application, the position
along the surface and the normal force exerted on the surface should both be
controlled; therefore, one must determine which variables should be force
controlled and which should be position controlled.




               Figure 9.3.1: Manipulator moving along perpendicular surface.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
480                                                               Force Control

   Following the task space concept given in Section 9.2, the task space
formulation for the manipulator system given in Figure 9.3.1 is


                                                                         (9.3.1)

with the task-space Jacobian matrix given by




As illustrated by (9.3.1), the task space and the joint space are equivalent for
this problem; therefore, we will refer to joint variables as task-space variables
throughout this problem.
   To design the position/force controller for the manipulator system, we
must first determine the dynamic equations for the task space formulation
given by (9.3.1). Using this task space formulation and neglecting joint
friction, the manipulator dynamics can be shown to be
                                                                         (9.3.2)

where ␶, M, G, and f are as defined in Example 9.2.1. The two dynamic
equations given in the matrix form represented by (9.3.2) are

                                                                         (9.3.3)

and
                                                                         (9.3.4)

In formulating a hybrid position/force controller, we design separate
controllers for the dynamics given by (9.3.3) and (9.3.4). As illustrated by
Figure 9.3.1, the position along the task space direction q2 should be position
controlled; therefore, we should use (9.3.4) for designing the position
controller. [This is obvious because the dynamics given by (9.3.3) do not
contain the task space variable q2.]
   Because we are designing a position controller to track a desired trajectory,
we will define the “tangent space” tracking error to be
                                                                         (9.3.5)

where qd2 represents the desired position trajectory along or tangent to the
surface. The position controller will be the computed-torque controller (see
Chapter 3)
                                                                         (9.3.6)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.3 Hybrid Position/Force Control                                           481

where

                                                                        (9.3.7)

with kTv and kTp being positive control gains. Substituting (9.3.6) into (9.3.4)
gives the position tracking error system
                                                                        (9.3.8)

By using the fact that kTv and kTp are positive, we can apply standard linear
control results to (9.3.8) to yield



therefore, asymptotic positional tracking is guaranteed with the controller
given by (9.3.6). Note that the position controller requires measurement of
the joint position, joint velocity, and surface friction force; therefore, from
an implementation point of view, force measurements are required in the
position controller.
   The position controller given in (9.3.6) will ensure good position tracking
along the surface of the environment; however, we also want to control the
force exerted on the environment. For the manipulator system given in Figure
9.3.1, the task space direction normal to the surface is q1; therefore, we will
assume that in this direction the environment can be modeled as a spring.
Specifically, the normal force f1 exerted on the environment is given by

                                                                        (9.3.9)

where ke represents the environment stiffness and qe=3. Taking the second
derivative of (9.3.9) with respect to time gives the expression

                                                                       (9.3.10)


where the normal task space acceleration is written in terms of the second
derivative of the normal force. Substituting (9.3.10) into (9.3.3) yields the
force dynamic equation

                                                                       (9.3.11)


We can now use the force dynamic equation given in (9.3.11) to design a
force controller to track a desired force trajectory. First, define the force
tracking error to be


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
482                                                             Force Control

                                                                     (9.3.12)

where fd1 represents the desired normal force that is to be exerted on the
environment. Similar to the position controller, the force controller will be
the computed-torque controller

                                                                     (9.3.13)

where

                                                                     (9.3.14)

with kNv and kNp being positive control gains. Substituting (9.3.13) into
(9.3.11) gives the force tracking error system,

                                                                     (9.3.15)

Using the fact kNv and kNp are positive in (9.3.15) yields



therefore, asymptotic force tracking is guaranteed with the controller given
by (9.3.13). It is important to realize that the force controller requires
measurement of the normal force and the derivative of the normal force.
Because the force derivative is often not available for measurement, it is
manufactured from (9.3.9), that is,

                                                                     (9.3.16)

therefore, the stiffness of the environment and the normal task space velocity
are used to simulate the derivative of the force.


Hybrid Position/Force Control of an N-Link Manipulator
The hybrid position/force controller given in the preceding section can easily
be extended to the multidegree case by using the task space formulation
concept. Specifically, one can develop a feedback-linearizing control that
will globally linearize the robot manipulator equation and then develop linear
controllers to track the desired force and position trajectories.
   First, the control designer selects a task space formulation


                                                                     (9.3.17)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.3 Hybrid Position/Force Control                                          483

such that the normal and tangent surface motions are decomposed as
discussed in Section 9.2. The robot dynamics given in (9.3.14) are then written
in terms of the task space acceleration by differentiating (9.3.17) twice with
respect to time to obtain
                                                                      (9.3.18)

where J(q) is the task space Jacobian defined in (9.2.11). Solving (9.3.18) for
q yields

                                                                      (9.3.19)


Substituting (9.3.19) into (9.2.14) yields



                                                                      (9.3.20)

The corresponding feedback linearizing control for the dynamics given by
(9.3.20) is given by



                                                                      (9.3.21)

where a is an n×1 vector used to represent the linear position and force
control strategies, which will be discussed later. After substituting (9.3.21)
into (9.3.20), we have
                                                                      (9.3.22)

From (9.3.22), we can see that the task space motion has been globally
linearized and decoupled; therefore, we can design the position and force
controllers independently in a method similar to that of the preceding section.
Specifically, linear position controllers can be designed for the task space
variables that represent tangent motion; moreover, linear force controllers
can be designed for the task space variables that represent normal force.
   Because the dynamics given in (9.3.20) have been decoupled in the task
space, we will define the tangent space components of x as xTi, where the
subscript T is used to denote the tangent space, and the subscript i is used to
denote the ith component of xT. From this notation the tangent space
components of (9.3.22) are given as

                                                                      (9.3.23)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
484                                                                 Force Control

where aTi is the ith linear tangent space position controller. For the purpose
of feedback control, we define the tangent space tracking error to be

                                                                         (9.3.24)

where xTdi represents the ith desired position trajectory tangent to the
environment surface. As in the preceding section, the corresponding linear
controller is then given as

                                                                         (9.3.25)

with kTvi and kTpi being the ith positive control gains. Substituting (9.3.25)
into (9.3.23) gives the position tracking error system

                                                                         (9.3.26)

Using the fact that kTvi and kTpi are positive in (9.3.26) yields




therefore, asymptotic positional tracking is guaranteed.
    For purposes of force control, we define the normal space components of
x as xNj where the subscript N is used to denote normal space, and the subscript
j is used to denote the jth component of xN. From this notation, the normal
space components of (9.3.22) are given as
                                                                         (9.3.27)

where aNj is the jth linear normal space force controller. As in the preceding
section, we assume that the environment can be modeled as a spring.
Specifically, the normal force fNj exerted on the environment is given by
                                                                         (9.3.28)

where kej is the jth component of environmental stiffness, and xej is used to
represent the static location of the environment in the direction of the normal
space xNj.
   As done for the single-degree-of-freedom robot in the preceding subsection,
we must formulate the force dynamics before we can develop the force
controller. Taking the second derivative of (9.3.28) with respect to time gives
the expression

                                                                         (9.3.29)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.3 Hybrid Position/Force Control                                         485

where the normal task space acceleration is written in terms of the second
derivative of the normal force. Substituting (9.3.29) into (9.3.27) yields the
force dynamics


                                                                     (9.3.30)


For the purpose of feedback control, we define the force tracking error to be

                                                                     (9.3.31)

where fNdj represents the jth component of the desired force exerted normal
to the environment. As in the preceding section, the corresponding linear
controller is then given by

                                                                     (9.3.32)

with kNvj and kNpj being the jth positive control gains. Substituting (9.3.32)
into (9.3.30) gives the force tracking error system

                                                                     (9.3.33)


Using the fact that kNvj and kNpj are positive in (9.3.33) yields




therefore, asymptotic force tracking is guaranteed.
   The hybrid position/force controller and the corresponding stability result
are both summarized in Table 9.3.1. We now illustrate the concept of hybrid
position/force control with an example.

EXAMPLE 9.3–1: Hybrid Position/Force Control Along a Slanted Surface
    We want to design and simulate a hybrid position/force controller for the
    robot manipulator system given in Figure 9.2.5. The control objective is
    to move the end effector with a desired surface trajectory of vd=sin(t) m
    while exerting a normal force trajectory of                 . We neglect
    joint friction and assume that the normal force (i.e., f1) satisfies the
    relationship


                                                                           (1)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
486                                                                         Force Control

                            Table 9.3.1: Hybrid Position/Force Controller




    where                 and ke=1000 N/m. The robot link masses are assumed
    to be unity, and the initial end-effector position is given by

                                                                                      (2)


    To accomplish the control objective, the hybrid position/force controller
    from Table 9.3.1 is given by

                                                                                      (3)

    where a is a 2×1 vector representing the linear position and force
    controllers with ␶, J, G, and f as defined in Example 9.2.1. The controller




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.3 Hybrid Position/Force Control                                           487

    given by (3) decouples the robot dynamics in the task space as follows:


                                                                            (4)


    From Figure 9.2.5, we can see that the task space variable u represents the
    normal space, and the task space variable v represents the tangent space;
    therefore, (4) may rewritten in the notation given in Table 9.3.1 as


                                                                            (5)


    From Table 9.3.1, the corresponding linear position and force controllers
    are then given by

                                                                            (6)

    and

                                                                            (7)


    where                              , and ke1=1000.
       The simulation of the hybrid position/force controller given by (3), (6),
    and (7) for the robotic manipulator system (Figure 9.2.5) is given in Figure
    9.3.2. The controller gains were selected as




    As indicated by the simulation, the position and force tracking error go to
    zero in about 4 s.
                                                                             䊏


Implementation Issues
After reexamining the hybrid position/force controller, one can see that the
task space forces are needed for implementation of the control law. Often
a wrist-mounted force sensor is used for measuring the end-effector forces;
however, in general, these forces will not be the task space forces that are
needed for control implementation. Fortunately, a transformation can be



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
488                                                                         Force Control




                  Figure 9.3.2: Simulation of hybrid position/force controller.




used to obtain the task space forces for any particular force application.
That is, the task space forces are related to the sensor forces by

                                                                                  (9.3.34)

where Js(q) is an n×n Jacobian sensor matrix, and fs is an n×1 vector of
sensor forces. Using (9.3.34), the task space forces are given by

                                                                                  (9.3.35)

As we mentioned earlier, the force control law requires measurement of the
task space force derivative; however, this signal is not usually available. Often,
the stiffness equation (9.3.28) is used to obtain the jth task space force
derivative as

                                                                                  (9.3.36)

which is in terms of the measurable jth task space normal velocity.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.4 Hybrid Impedance Control                                                      489




                            Figure 9.3.3: Hybrid position/force controller.




With these implementational concerns in mind, the overall hybrid position/
force control strategy is depicted in Figure 9.3.3. The feedforward terms in
the block diagram are used to represent the terms

                                                                              (9.3.37)

in the control law given in Table 9.3.1.


9.4 Hybrid Impedance Control

Impedance control is based on the concept that the controller should be used
to regulate the dynamic behavior between the robot manipulator motion
and the force exerted on the environment [Hogan 1987] rather than
considering the motion and force control problems separately. Using this
concept, the control designer specifies the desired dynamic behavior between
the motion of the manipulator and the force exerted on the environment.
This desired behavior is sometimes referred to as the target impedance because
it is used to represent an Ohm’s law type of relationship between motion and
force.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
490                                                               Force Control

Modeling the Environment
As pointed out in [Hogan 1987], the environmental model is central to any
force control strategy. In the force control strategies discussed previously,
the environment has simply been modeled as a spring; however, as one might
imagine, a simple spring model may not adequately describe all types of
environments. To classify the many types of environments, we use the linear
transfer function relationship

                                                                         (9.4.1)

where the variable s is the Laplace transform variable, f represents the force
exerted on the environment, x represents the velocity of the manipulator at
the environmental contact point, and Ze(s) represents the environmental
impedance. For now, all quantities are assumed to be scalar functions;
however, at the end of this section we generalize impedance control to the
multidimensional case.
   The quantity Ze(s) is called an impedance because (9.4.1) represents an
Ohm’s law type of relationship between motion and force. As in circuit theory,
environmental impedances can be separated into different categories. To
further our impedance control discussion, we now give three commonly used
categories which are used to classify environmental impedances.

DEFINITION 9.4–1 An impedance is inertial if and only if |Z(0)|=0.
                                                                              䊏

An illustration of an inertial environment is given in Figure 9.4.1a. This
figure depicts a robot manipulator moving a payload of mass h with velocity
x. The corresponding interaction force is given by



therefore, utilizing (9.4.1) yields an inertial environmental impedance of

                                                                         (9.4.2)

We can easily verify that this impedance is indeed inertial by applying
Definition 9.4.1.

DEFINITION 9.4–2 An impedance is resistive if and only if |Z(0)|=c where
0<c<⬁.                                                                䊏

An illustration of a resistive environment is given in Figure 9.4.1b. This figure
depicts a robot manipulator moving through a liquid medium with velocity x.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.4 Hybrid Impedance Control                                                491




                               Figure 9.4.1: Environmental impedances.



The liquid medium is assumed to have a damping coefficient of b. The
corresponding interaction force is given by




therefore, utilizing (9.4.1) yields a resistive environmental impedance of

                                                                         (9.4.3)

We can easily verify that this impedance is indeed resistive by applying
Definition 9.4.2.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
492                                                                Force Control

DEFINITION 9.4–3 An impedance is capacitive if and only if |Z(O)|= ⬁.
                                                                               䊏

An illustration of a capacitive environment is given in Figure 9.4.1c.
This figure depicts a robot manipulator pushing against an object of
mass h with velocity x. The object is assumed to have a damping
coefficient of b and a spring constant of k. The corresponding interaction
force is given by




therefore, utilizing (9.4.1) yields a capacitive environmental impedance of


                                                                          (9.4.4)


We can easily verify that this impedance is indeed capacitive by applying
Definition 9.4.3.


Position and Force Control Models
As we have seen in the preceding section, the environment can be modeled as
an impedance defined by the force/velocity relationship in (9.4.1). For our
impedance control formulation, we will assume that the environmental
impedance is either inertial, resistive, or capacitive. The question then
becomes: How does one design a controller for a given environmental
impedance? The solution is obtained by formulating a manipulator impedance
model, Zm(s) [Anderson and Spong 1988]. In other words, a manipulator
impedance (or target impedance) is selected after the environment has been
modeled. The criterion for selecting the manipulator impedance is related to
the dynamic performance of the manipulator. That is, the manipulator
impedance is selected such that there is zero steadystate error to a step input
(which may be a force or velocity command). As we will show, this
performance criterion can be achieved if the manipulator impedance is the
dual of the environmental impedance.
   Before the concept of duality can be illustrated fully, the models for position
and force control must be formulated. For position control [Anderson and
Spong 1988], the relationship between force and velocity is modeled by

                                                                          (9.4.5)

where xd represents the input velocity of the manipulator at the environmental
contact point and Zm(s) represents the manipulator impedance.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.4 Hybrid Impedance Control                                                   493

   As we will show subsequently, the manipulator impedance Zm(s) is selected
to “zero-out” the steady state to a step input by utilizing the dynamic
relationship between x and xd, To determine the dynamic relation between x
and xd. we combine (9.4.1) with (9.4.5) to yield the position control block
diagram given in Figure 9.4.2. We can use this block diagram to illustrate
the concept of duality. Specifically, we examine the steady-state velocity error

                                                                            (9.4.6)

where               for a step velocity input. Utilizing Figure 9.4.2, we can
easily show that (9.4.6) can be reduced to


                                                                            (9.4.7)


For Ess to be equal to zero in (9.4.7), Ze(s) must be a noncapacitive impedance
[i.e., Ze(s) must be inertial or resistive], and Zm(s) must be a noninertial
impedance. That is, zero steady-state error can be achieved for a velocity
step input if inertial environments are position controlled with noninertial
manipulator impedances, while resistive environments are position controlled
with capacitive manipulator impedances. The aforementioned term duality
is used to emphasize the fact that inertial environmental impedances can be
position controlled with capacitive manipulator impedances.




                            Figure 9.4.2: Position control block diagram.



From the development above, it is obvious that a capacitive environment
cannot be position controlled and maintain the zero steady-state error
specification. However, subsequently we will show that capacitive
environments can be force controlled while maintaining the zero steady-
state error specification. With regard to force control, the dynamic relationship
between force and velocity is modeled [Anderson and Spong 1988] by

                                                                            (9.4.8)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
494                                                              Force Control

where fd is used to represent the input force exerted at the environmental
contact point.
   As we will show subsequently, the manipulator impedance Zm(s) is selected
to “zero-out” the steady state to a step input by utilizing the dynamic
relationship between f and fd. To determine the dynamic relation between f
and fd, we combine (9.4.1) with (9.4.8) to yield the force control block diagram
given in Figure 9.4.3. We can use this block diagram to illustrate the concept
of duality. Specifically, we examine the steady-state force error

                                                                        (9.4.9)

where fd(s)=1/s for a step force input. Utilizing Figure 9.4.3, we can easily
show that (9.4.9) can be reduced to


                                                                       (9.4.10)


For Ess to be equal to zero in (9.4.10), Ze(s) must be a noninertial impedance,
and Zm(s) must be a noncapacitive impedance. That is, zero steady-state
error can be achieved for a force step input if capacitive environments are
force controlled with noncapacitive manipulator impedances while resistive
environments are force controlled with inertial manipulator impedances.
The term “duality” is used to emphasize the fact that capacitive
environmental impedances can be force controlled with inertial manipulator
impedances.
   The discussion above can be summarized by the following duality
principle.

DUALITY PRINCIPLE Capacitive environments are force controlled with
noncapacitive manipulator impedances, inertial environments are position
controlled with noninertial manipulator impedances, and resistive
environments are force controlled with inertial manipulator impedances or
position controlled with capacitive manipulator impedances.


Impedance Control Formulation
Now that we have illustrated how the environment and the manipulator can
be modeled as impedances, we develop an “impedance” controller based on
this model. To utilize an impedance control approach, the control designer
selects a task space formulation


                                                                       (9.4.11)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.4 Hybrid Impedance Control                                                   495




                              Figure 9.4.3: Force control block diagram.



for the particular position/force control application. As in Section 9.3, we
can show that the torque control



                                                                           (9.4.12)

yields the linear set of equations

                                                                           (9.4.13)

where a is an n×1 vector used to represent the impedance position and force
control strategies.
   As delineated by (9.4.13), the task space motion has been globally
linearized; therefore, we can design separate position and force controllers
for each task space degree of freedom. That is, in each task space direction
represented by a component xk, an environmental impedance relationship
between xk and the corresponding environmental force fk is assigned. Based
on this assignment of environmental impedance, the duality principle is
used to determine if the corresponding element of a should be a force or
position controller. After this determination is made, (9.4.5) and (9.4.8)
are then used to obtain the specific position and force control components
of a.
   As a means of separating the position control design from the force control
design, we use (9.4.13) to define the equations that are position controlled
in the task space directions as

                                                                           (9.4.14)

where the subscript i denotes the ith position-controlled task space
variable, and the subscript p denotes position control. The associated
environmental forces in the position controlled task space directions are
denoted by fpi.
   Assuming zero initial conditions, the Laplace transform of (9.4.14) can
be written as


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
496                                                              Force Control

                                                                       (9.4.15)

From the position control model given by (9.4.5), we can also write the left-
hand side of (9.4.15) as

                                                                       (9.4.16)

where Zpmi is the ith position-controlled manipulator impedance. Therefore,
equating (9.4.16) and (9.4.15) gives the ith position controller

                                                                       (9.4.17)

where L-1 is used to represent the inverse Laplace transform operation.
   Continuing with the separation of position and force control designs, we
use (9.4.13) to define the equations that are to be force controlled in the task
space directions as

                                                                       (9.4.18)

where the subscript j denotes the jth force-controlled task space variable,
and the subscript f denotes force control. The associated environmental forces
in the force-controlled task space directions are denoted by ffj.
   Assuming zero initial conditions, the Laplace transform of (9.4.18) can
be written as:

                                                                       (9.4.19)

From the force control model given in (9.4.8), the left-hand side of (9.4.19)
can also be written as

                                                                       (9.4.20)



                                                                       (9.4.21)

where Zfmj is the jth force-controlled manipulator impedance. Therefore,
equating (9.4.21) and (9.4.19) gives the jth force controller
   The overall “hybrid” impedance control strategy is obtained by using
(9.4.12) in conjunction with (9.4.17) and (9.4.20). This hybrid impedance
control strategy is summarized in Table 9.4.1. Note that a higher-level
controller would be used to select the components of the task space which


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.4 Hybrid Impedance Control                                                  497

                              Table 9.4.1: Hybrid Impedance Controller




would be position or force controlled and then the appropriate manipulator
impedances would be assigned. As delineated by the duality principle, the
manipulator impedances Zfmj in (9.4.20) are assigned to be noncapacitive
and the manipulator impedances Zpmi in (9.4.17) are assigned to be non-
inertial. To illustrate the concept of hybrid impedance control, we now present
an example.

EXAMPLE 9.4–1: Hybrid Impedance Control Along a Slanted
Surface
    We wish to formulate a hybrid impedance controller for the robot
    manipulator system given in Figure 9.2.5. The joint and surface friction
    may be neglected, and we assume that the tangential force (i.e., f2) satisfies
    the relationship

                                                                              (1)

    and the normal force (i.e., f1) satisfies the relationship


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
498                                                             Force Control

                                                                           (2)

where he, be, de, and ke are all positive scalar constants.
  From Table 9.4.1, the hybrid impedance controller is given by

                                                                           (3)

where a is a 2×1 vector representing the separate position and force control
strategies, and ␶, J, G, and f are as defined in Example 9.2.1. The torque
controller given by (3) decouples the robot dynamics in the task space as
follows:


                                                                           (4)


therefore, we can easily determine which task space directions should be
force or position controlled.
   Applying Definition 9.4.2 to (1) allows us to state that the environmental
impedance in the task space direction given by v is a resistive impedance;
therefore, by the duality principle, we will select a position controller that
utilizes the capacitive manipulator impedance


                                                                           (5)


where hm, bm, and km are all positive scalar constants. Since the task space
variable v will be position controlled, we use the notation from (9.4.14) to
yield




and




Now using (5) and the definition of ap1 given in Table 9.4.1, we can easily
show that

                                                                           (6)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.4 Hybrid Impedance Control                                                  499

Applying Definition 9.4.3 to (2) allows us to state that the environmental
impedance in the task space direction given by u is capacitive; therefore, by
the duality principle, we will select a force controller that utilizes the inertial
manipulator impedance

                                                                               (7)

where dm is a positive scalar constant. Since the task space variable u will be
force controlled, we use the notation from (9.4.18) to yield




and




Using (7) and the definition of a f1 given in Table 9.4.1, we can easily show
that

                                                                               (8)


The overall impedance control strategy is obtained by substituting


                                                                               (9)


into (3), where ap1 and af1 are as given by (6) and (8), respectively.
                                                                                䊏


Implementation Issues
As mentioned earlier, the manipulator impedance Zm(s) is selected such
that the duality principle is maintained. However, from a practical point of
view, Zm(s) should also be selected in the expressions for api and afj such
that only measurements of f, x, and x are required. In other words, our
controller should not require acceleration (i.e., x) or force derivative (i.e.,
f) measurements. We can easily show that the expressions for api and afj
will not require measurements of f and x if the manipulator impedance is
selected as




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
500                                                                        Force Control




                              Figure 9.4.4: Hybrid impedance controller.




where h is some positive scalar constant, and Zr is selected to be a proper
transfer function [Anderson and Spong 1988].
   As delineated by Table 9.4.1, the hybrid impedance controller requires
task space force measurements. As stated previously for the hybrid position/
force controller, a transformation can be used to obtain the task space forces
for any particular force application. Specifically, the task space forces are
related to the sensor forces by




where Js(q) is an n×n Jacobian sensor matrix, and fs is an n×1 vector of
sensor forces.
   With these implementation concerns in mind, the overall hybrid impedance
control strategy is depicted in Figure 9.4.4. The feedforward terms in the
block diagram are used to represent the terms


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.5 Reduced State Position/Force Control                                    501




9.5 Reduced State Position/Force Control

If a rigid manipulator is constrained by a rigid environment, the degrees
of freedom are reduced because the manipulator end effector cannot
move through the environment; therefore, one or more degrees of
freedom with regard to position are lost. Consequently, as the
manipulator end effector contacts the environmental constraint,
interaction forces between the end effector and the environment
(sometimes referred to as constraint forces) develop. This process of
“reducing” positional freedom while developing constraint forces leads
one to believe that position/force controllers should be designed
according to this natural phenomenon.
   Recently, researchers have begun to formulate a theoretical framework
[McClamroch and Wang 1988], [Kankaanranta and Koivo 1988] that
incorporates the effects of the constraint forces into the robot manipulator
model by utilizing classical results in dynamics. The reasoning for
postulating that controllers should be designed for a rigid manipulator
contacting a rigid constraint is that in most force control applications, the
environment is much more rigid than the manipulator. Therefore, it seems
unreasonable to assume that the manipulator is rigid while the environment
is compliant.


Effects of Holonomic Constraints on the Manipulator Dynamics
For the controller given in this section, we assume that the environmental
constraints are holonomic and frictionless. That is, we assume the existence
of a constraint function    (a p×1 vector function) in joint-space coordinates
that satisfies

                                                                        (9.5.1)

The relationship given by (9.5.1) illustrates that the environmental constraints
are holonomic. The dimension of the constraint function is assumed to be
less than the number of joint variables (i.e., p<n). For a specific problem, the
function       is found from the robot kinematics and the environmental
configuration. To illustrate the holonomic concept, we now present an
example.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
502                                                               Force Control

EXAMPLE 9.5–1: Holonomic Constraints
    We wish to formulate the constraint function ␺(q) for the robot/
    environmental configurations given in Figs. 9.2–5 and 9.2–6. In both of
    these configurations, the joint space has a dimension of 2 and the constraint
    function has a dimension of 1 (i.e., the constraint is a one-dimensional
    surface). For the manipulator system given in Figure 9.2.5, the constraint
    function is given by




    For the manipulator system given in Figure 9.2.6, the constraint function
    is given by



                                                                              䊏
    For the general n-link robot manipulator with holonomic and frictionless
    constraints, the constrained robot dynamics can be written in the form

                                                                         (9.5.2)

    where ␭ is a p×1 vector that represents the generalized force multipliers
    associated with the constraints, and the constraint Jacobian matrix A(q)
    is a p×n matrix defined by

                                                                         (9.5.3)

    As in [Kankaanranta and Koivo 1988], we will assume that the p columns
    of AT(q) are linearly independent over the joint space. Also, note that the
    force variable ␭ is independent of q and q.
       To motivate the origin of (9.5.2), we reexamine Lagrange’s equation


                                                                         (9.5.4)


    where the modified Lagrangian for the constrained robot manipulator is
    given by
                                                                         (9.5.5)

    Note that the Lagrangian given in (9.5.5) is really the same Lagrangian as
    given in Chapter 2, since


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.5 Reduced State Position/Force Control                                  503




as required by (9.5.1).
   From (9.5.4) and (9.5.5), we can see that the structure of the robot
manipulator dynamic equation is the same for the constrained manipulator
as for the unconstrained manipulator with the exception of any new terms
contributed by the substitution of                  in Lagrange’s equation.
Specifically, the constrained robot manipulator equation given in (9.5.2) is
obtained by substituting (9.5.5) into (9.5.4) utilizing the identity




Before we develop the reduced-state position/force controller, we explain
briefly, from a heuristic point of view, how the position and force variables
have been reduced in dimension. First, note that for the constrained robot
dynamics given in (9.5.2), the variable ␭ is used to represent the constraint
forces that should be controlled. Note that the dimension of ␭ is p, which,
by definition, is less than n. In previous formulations of the environmental
forces given in this chapter, the dimension of the forces was assumed to be
equal to n. In this approach we are able to reduce the number of forces
that must be controlled because we have initially assumed that the constraint
surface is frictionless. Of course, in reality, surface friction will exist in
most robot force control applications; however, it is often treated as a
disturbance because such friction is a function of the applied normal contact
force.
   Second, we examine the position constraints on robot motion given by
(9.5.1). Because ␺ (q)=0 by assumption, we can differentiate (9.5.1)
withrespect to time to obtain

                                                                       (9.5.6)

where A(q) is defined in (9.5.3). The expression given by (9.5.6) gives a
concise form for the kinematic velocity constraints. From the position and
velocity constraints given in (9.5.1) and (9.5.6), we can state that the
manipulator dynamics belong to the invariant manifold C, in R2n, defined by




That is, the motion of the robot manipulator remains on the manifold defined
by C. As stated in [McClamroch and Wang 1988], the manifold C is singular
on R2n; therefore, we can reduce the order of the motion dynamics.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
504                                                              Force Control

Reduced State Modeling and Control
A robot system consisting of a single n-joint nonredundant manipulator
constrained by a rigid environment has n-p degrees of motion freedom. Note,
however, that the joint variable model of a manipulator as given in (9.5.2)
contains n position variables (q), which, in combination with the p force
variables (␭), cause the total number of control variables (i.e., states) n+p to
exceed the number of control inputs n. In this section we show how a variable
transformation can be used to reduce the states of the dynamical model and
thereby reduce the number of control variables from n+p to n.
   A reduced state model can be obtained by representing the manipulator
dynamics given in (9.5.2) in terms of another set of independent coordinates,
called the constraint space coordinates, which will be denoted by x. It is
intended that x be an (n-p)×1 vector of joint space coordinates. That is, x is
a subset of q.
   The constrained robot model is reduced by assuming that there exists an
n×1 vector function g(x) that relates the constraint space vector x [an (n-
p)×1 vector] to the joint space vector q. This function is given by

                                                                        (9.5.7)

where the function g(x) must be selected such that


                                                                        (9.5.8)


and such that the n×(n-p) Jacobian matrix ⌺(x) defined as

                                                                        (9.5.9)

contains n-p independent rows along the constraint space motion given by x.
   Even though the constraint space vector x is of smaller dimension than the
joint space vector q, one is usually able to find the functional mapping from x
to q given in (9.5.7). For particular problems, the algebraic relations given by
the holonomic equation (9.5.1) and the robot kinematics are used to find g(x).
Also note that the choice of g(x) is nonunique and that the conditions on g(x)
given by (9.5.8) and on the rows of ⌺(x) are related to the reduced state model.
Specifically, the condition that ⌺(x) contain n-p independent rows ensures
that the decoupled model represents n-p independent equations. The condition
on g(x) given by (9.5.8) is used to ensure that the forces represented by ␭ can
be decoupled from the constraint space motion represented by x. It should be
noted that since the constraints are assumed to be holonomic and the matrix


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.5 Reduced State Position/Force Control                                      505

AT(q) is assumed to have p linearly independent columns, we can show that
both of the conditions above always hold. The reader is referred to
[McClamroch and Wang 1988] for details.
  To obtain the reduced state dynamics in terms of the constraint space
coordinates, we first differentiate (9.5.7) with respect to time to yield

                                                                          (9.5.10)

where Σ(x) is defined in (9.5.9). Differentiating (9.5.10) with respect to time
gives
                                                                          (9.5.11)

After substituting q, q, and q, from (9.5.7), (9.5.10), and (9.5.11), respectively,
into (9.5.2), we obtain the reduced-state model

                                                                          (9.5.12)

where




The significance of the reduced state model given by (9.5.12) is illustrated by
premultiplying (9.5.12) by ΣT(x) to obtain
                                                                          (9.5.13)

where




Note that the contact forces in (9.5.12) have been removed as a consequence
of (9.5.8), which ensures that                   The model given by (9.5.13)
is useful because the dynamics that govern the motion of the manipulator on
the constraint surface have been reduced from n differential equations to n-
p differential equations; furthermore, the motion has been decoupled from
the contact forces. These two results are important in the design and stability
analysis of the subsequent position/force controllers.
    Before the reduced state position/force controller is presented, we give
some definitions with regard to position/force tracking problems. First, the
constraint position tracking error is defined as

                                                                          (9.5.14)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
506                                                                 Force Control

We assume that the desired constraint space trajectory and its first two
derivatives, denoted by xd, xd, and xd, respectively, are all bounded functions.
We also assume that the desired force multiplier trajectory, ␭d, is a known
bounded function, from which the corresponding force multiplier tracking
error variable is defined as

                                                                          (9.5.15)

The reduced state position/force controller is a feedback linearizing controller;
therefore, exact knowledge of the robot dynamics is required. The reduced
state controller [McClamroch and Wang 1988] is



                                                                          (9.5.16)
where Kv and Kp are diagonal, positive-definite (n-p)×(n-p) matrices, and Kf
is a diagonal, positive-definite p×p matrix.
   To determine the type of stability for the position error and force tracking
error, we substitute (9.5.16) into (9.5.12) to yield

                                                                          (9.5.17)


Premultiplying (9.5.17) by ⌺T(x) yields
                                                                          (9.5.18)

as a consequence of (9.5.8). Because ⌺T(x) contains n-p independent columns
along the constraint space motion and M(x) is a positive-definite symmetric
matrix, M* is a positive-definite symmetric matrix. Therefore, we can
premultiply (9.5.18) by M*-1 to obtain

                                                                          (9.5.19)

Because Kv and Kp are diagonal positive-definite matrices, one can apply
standard linear control arguments to (9.5.19) to yield

                                                                          (9.5.20)


To obtain the stability result for the force tracking error, we substitute (9.5.20)
into (9.5.17) to yield

                                                                          (9.5.21)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.5 Reduced State Position/Force Control                                         507

where I in (9.5.21) is the p×p identity matrix. Because the p columns of
AT(x) are assumed to be linearly independent and the composite matrix (I+Kf)
is a positive-definite, diagonal matrix, we can write (9.5.21) as

                                                                             (9.5.22)


As delineated by (9.5.20) and (9.5.22), the reduced state position/force
controller given in (9.5.16) yields an asymptotic stability result for both
the constraint position error and force tracking error. The reduced state
position/force control strategy is summarized in Table 9.5.1. To illustrate
the concept of reduced state position/force control, we now present an
example.


                      Table 9.5.1: Reduced State Position/Force Controller




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
508                                                                Force Control

EXAMPLE 9.5–2: Reduced State Position/Force Control Along a Slanted
Surface
    We wish to formulate a reduced state position/force controller for the
    robot manipulator system given in Figure 9.2.5. The joint and surface
    friction may be neglected. As given in Example 9.5.1, the constraint
    function for this problem is




    therefore, utilizing (9.5.2) and (9.5.3), the robot dynamics on the constraint
    surface can be written as

                                                                              (1)

    where ␶, M, q, and G are as defined in Example 9.2.1 and


                                                                              (2)


    For this problem, assume that x=q1; therefore, according to (9.5.7), we
    must find the function g(x) such that




    From the holonomic constraints, we can easily verify from the kinematic
    relationships that


                                                                              (3)


    Utilizing (9.5.9), we can show that


                                                                              (4)


    therefore, from Table 9.5.1, the reduced state position/force controller is
    given by

                                                                              (5)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.5 Reduced State Position/Force Control                                      509

    where xd represents the desired trajectory of q1 and ␭d represents the desired
    force multiplier.
       For this problem we can easily examine how ␭ is related to the normal
    force exerted on the surface by equating the expression for the forces in
    Example 9.2.1 and this example. Specifically, we have


                                                                              (6)


    where J and f are as defined in Example 9.2.1. Because the surface
    friction has been neglected (i.e., f2=0 in Figure 9.2.5), we can use (6) to
    show that

                                                                              (7)


    where f1 is defined as the normal force exerted on the surface in Figure
    9.2.5. Similarly, from the kinematic relationships, we have

                                                                              (8)


    where v is defined to be the end-effector position measured along the
    surface. It should be noted that the relationships given by (7) and (8)
    would be used for trajectory generation since the position and force
    control objectives would be formulated in terms of the variables f1 and
    v. That is, ␭d would be obtained from the desired normal force (i.e., fd1),
    and qd1 would be obtained from the desired end-effector surface position
    (i.e., vd).

Implementation Issues
As delineated by Table 9.5.1, the reduced state position/force controller
requires measurements of the force variable ␭. As stated previously for the
hybrid position/force control development, a transformation can be used to
obtain measurements of ␭ for any particular force application. That is, the
force variables ␭ are related to the sensor forces by

                                                                         (9.5.23)

where Js (q) is an n×n Jacobian sensor matrix, and fs is an n×1 vector of
sensor forces. From (9.5.23), p independent equations can be obtained such
that ␭ is given by


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
510                                                                             Force Control




                       Figure 9.5.1: Reduced state position/force controller.



where g1(q, fs) is a p×1 vector function that depends only on the measurable
quantities q and fs.
   With these implement at ional concerns in mind, the overall reduced order
position/force control strategy is depicted in Figure 9.5.1. The feedforward
terms in the block diagram are used to represent the terms




9.6 Summary

In this chapter several position/force control strategies for rigid robots
have been given. The intent has been to chronicle the evolution of force
control development. Some new research areas, such as the effects of
actuator dynamics, sensor dynamics, joint flexibilities, manipulator
dynamic uncertainty, surface uncertainty, and environmental impact


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9.6 Summary                                                           511

instability on position/force controller performance are now being studied
by many researchers. After some of these problems have been solved, one
can expect to see robot manipulators used more frequently in force control
applications.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES

[Anderson and Spong 1988] Anderson, R., and M.Spong, “Hybrid impedance control
    of robotic manipulators,” J. Robot. Autom., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 549–556, Oct.
    1988.
[Chae et al. 1988] Chae, A., C.Atkeson, and J.Hollerbach, Model-Based Control of a
    Robot Manipulator. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988.
[Hogan 1987] Hogan, N., “Stable execution of contact tasks using impedance control,”
    Proc. IEEE Int. Conf Robot. Autom., pp. 595–601, Raleigh NC, Mar. 1987.
[Kankaanranta and Koivo 1988] Kankaanranta, R., and H.Koivo, “Dynamics and
    simulation of compliant motion of a manipulator,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom.,
    vol. 4, pp. 163–173, Apr. 1988.
[Lipkin and Duffy 1988] Lipkin, H., and J.Duffy, “Hybrid twist and wrench control
    for a robot manipulator,” Trans. AS ME J. Median. Transmissions Autom. Design,
    vol. 110, pp. 138–144, June 1988.
[McClamroch and Wang 1988] McClamroch, N., and D.Wang, “Feedback
   stabilization and tracking of constrained robots,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control,
   vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 419–426, May 1988.
[Raibert and Craig 1981] Raibert, M., and J.Craig, “Hybrid position/force control of
    manipulators,” J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control, vol. 102, pp. 126–132, June 1981.
[Salisbury and Craig 1980] Salisbury, J., and J.Craig, “Active stiffness control of
     manipulator in Cartesian coordinates,” Proc. 19th IEEE Conf. Decision Control,
     Dec. 1980.
[Spong and Vidyasagar 1989] Spong, M., and M.Vidyasagar, Robot Dynamics and
    Control. New York: Wiley, 1989.




                                                                               513
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
514                                                                 REFERENCES


PROBLEMS

Section 9.2
9.2–1        Find the associated task space Jacobian matrix for the normal and
             tangent forces exerted on the environmental surface for the
             manipulator given in Figure 9.2.6 with the new surface function
             given by




9.2–2        Design and simulate a stiffness controller for the robot manipulator
             system given in Figure 9.2.5 with the surface function given by




             The control objective is to move the end effector to a desired final
             position of qd2=0.3 m while exerting a final desired normal force of
             2 N. Neglect the surface and joint friction and assume that the normal
             force satisfies the relationship




             where ke=100 N/m, and ue is the static normal distance to the surface.
             The robot link masses can be assumed to be unity while the initial
             end-effector position is assume to be given by




Section 9.3
9.3–1        Since the position and force error systems for the hybrid position/
             force control strategies are linear, discuss how the selection of the
             controller gains can be used to change the performance of the
             manipulator end effector.

9.3–2        Design and simulate a hybrid position/force controller for the robot
             manipulator system given in Figure 9.2.5 with the surface function
             given




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES                                                                        515

             The control objective is to move the end effector along the surface
             with trajectory




             while exerting a desired normal force of




             Neglect the surface and joint friction and assume that the normal
             force satisfies the relationship




             where ke=1000 N/m, and ue is the static normal distance to the
             surface. The robot link masses can be assumed to be unity while the
             initial end-effector position is assumed to be given by




9.3–3        Explain why the hybrid position/force control strategy is really a
             positional control strategy.


Section 9.4
9.4–1        Suppose that for force or position control, the manipulator
             impedance is selected to be




             where h is positive scalar constant, and Zr(s) is a proper stable transfer
             function. With the manipulator impedance above, show that the
             hybrid impedance controller will only require measurements of the
             joint position, joint velocity, and contact force.

9.4–2        Design a hybrid impedance controller for the robot manipulator
             system given in Figure 9.2.5 with the surface function given by




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
516                                                                    REFERENCES

             Neglect the surface and joint friction and assume that the normal
             force and tangent force satisfies the relationship




             where ke=10 N/m, be=1 N-s/m, and ue is the static normal distance
             to the surface.

9.4–3        Explicitly show how Table 9.4.1 can be used to find equation (6) in
             Example 9.4.1.


Section 9.5
9.5–1        Design a reduced state controller for the robot manipulator system
             given in Figure 9.2.6.

9.5–2        For the controller developed in Problem 9.5–1, show how the normal
             force (i.e., f1) is related to the force multiplier (i.e., ␭), and how the
             reduced motion variable (i.e., x) is related to the motion along the
             surface (i.e., v).




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
