Appendix B

Software for Controller
Simulation
An excellent way to gain an intuitive feel for control systems design and
performance is to perform computer simulations. It is conceptually a short
step from simulation to actual implementation, since the subroutines that are
used on today’s digital signal processors are very similar to those used for
simulation. This appendix contains the software used in the text for robot
controller simulation.
   There are some good software packages available for design and simulation
of systems, and one should be aware of them and employ them. Examples are
MATLAB, MATRIXX, Program CC, SIMNON, and so on. However, it is
very instructive to use one’s own software during the learning phase, especially
since it is sometimes not clear exactly what is going on in some of these
packages when dealing with digital control.
   For the time-response simulation of continuous systems, a Runge-Kutta
integrator works very well. In Figure B.1.1 is shown program TRESP, which
uses a fourth-order Runge-Kutta subroutine to implement the simulation
procedure discussed in Section 3.3. It integrates linear or nonlinear systems in
the state-variable form



In Section 2.4 we showed how to place the robot dynamics into this form.
Note that MATLAB’s functions ode 23 and ode 45 are adaptive step size
Runge-Kutta integrators that need the same form for the dynamics.
   TRESP requires a subroutine F(time, x, xp), which computes x (denoted


                                                                            591
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
592                                         Software for Controller Simulation



xp, or “x prime”) from the current state x(t) and control input u(t). The control
u(t) and any outputs of the form



   are placed into COMMON storage [e.g., u(t) can be computed outside
F(time, x, xp), and y(t) is needed for plotting in TRESP]. Samples of the use of
TRESP are given in examples throughout the book.
   A parameter array PAR( ) in common makes it easy to perform successive
runs with different parameter values (e.g., PD gains). A time delay can be
injected into the continuous dynamics if desired (e.g., using a ring buffer).
   It is important to realize the following. To update x(kTR) to x((k+ 1)TR),
the Runge-Kutta integrator calls subroutine F(time, x, xp) four times during
each Runge-Kutta integration period TR. During these four calls, the control
input should be held constant at u(kTR). Using subroutine SYSINP to compute
u(kTR) accomplishes this.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
                                          593




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
594                                       Software for Controller Simulation




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
                                                                           595




Figure B.1–1: Program TRESP for time response of nonlinear continuous systems.


   For digital control simulation, TRESP needs subroutine DIG(IK, T, x),
which contains the discrete controller equations; it is called once in every
sample period T. The time TR should be selected as an integral divisor of T.
Five or 10 Runge-Kutta periods within each sample period is usually sufficient.
   The program also allows digital filtering (e.g., for reconstruction of ve-
locity estimates from joint position encoder measurements). Note that for


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
596                                          Software for Controller Simulation

digital controls purposes, subroutine DIG is called before the Runge-Kutta
routine, while for digital filtering, DIG is called after the call to Runge-Kutta.
   For some systems the Runge-Kutta integrator in the figure may not work;
then an adaptive step-size Runge-Kutta routine (e.g., Runge-KuttaFehlburg)
can be used [Press et al. 1986]. (Note: The program given here works for all
examples in the book.)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCE

[Press et al. 1986] Press, W.H., Flannery, B.P., Teukolsky, S.A., and
    Vetterling, W.T., Numerical Recipes. New York: Cambridge University
    Press, 1986.




                                                                   597
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
