Chapter 6

Adaptive Control of
Robotic Manipulators
In this chapter adaptive controllers are formulated by separating unknown
constant parameters from known functions in the robot dynamic equation.
The type of stability for each adaptive control strategy is discussed at length
to motivate the formulation of the controllers. Some issues regarding
parameter error convergence, persistency of excitation, and robustness are
also discussed.


6.1 Introduction
The problem of designing adaptive control laws for rigid-robot manipulators
that ensure asymptotic trajectory tracking has interested researchers for many
years. The development of effective adaptive controllers represents an
important step toward high-speed/precision robotic applications. Even in a
well-structured industrial facility, robots may face uncertainty regarding the
parameters describing the dynamic properties of the grasp load (e.g., unknown
moments of inertia). Since these parameters are difficult to compute or
measure, they limit the potential for robots to manipulate accurately objects
of considerable size and weight. It has recently been recognized that the
accuracy of conventional approaches in high-speed applications is greatly
affected by parametric uncertainties.
   To compensate for this parametric uncertainty, many researchers have
proposed adaptive strategies for the control of robotic manipulators. An
advantage of the adaptive approach over the robust control strategies
discussed in Chapter 5 is that the accuracy of a manipulator carrying unknown

                                                                           329
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
330                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

loads improves with time because the adaptation mechanism continues
extracting information from the tracking error. Therefore, adaptive controllers
can give consistent performance in the face of load variations.
   It is only recently that adaptive control results have included rigorous
proofs for global convergence of the tracking error. Now that the existence
of globally convergent adaptive control laws has been established, it is difficult
to justify control schemes based on approximate models, local linearization
techniques, or slowly time varying assumptions. In the control literature
there also seems to be no general agreement as to what constitutes an adaptive
control algorithm; therefore, in this chapter, the discussion will be limited to
control schemes that explicitly incorporate parameter estimation in the control
law.


6.2        Adaptive Control by a Computed-Torque
           Approach
In Chapter 3 we motivated the use of the computed-torque control law for
controlling the robotic manipulator dynamics given by

                                                                           (6.2.1)

This motivation was actually quite simple. Specifically, if there are some
nonlinear dynamics which one does not wish to deal with, one can change
the nonlinear control problem to a linear control problem by directly canceling
the nonlinearities. There is a wealth of available knowledge for controlling
linear systems; therefore, if exact knowledge of the robot model is available,
there is not much need for sophisticated nonlinear control techniques.


Approximate Computed-Torque Controller
Of course, in reality, we never have exact knowledge of the robot model due
to many problems associated with model formulation. Two common
uncertainties that do not allow exact model cancellation in robotic
applications are unknown link masses due to payload disturbances and
unknown friction coefficients. One way of dealing with these types of
parametric uncertainties would be to use the computed-torque controller
given in Chapter 3 with some fixed estimate of the unknown parameters in
place of the actual parameters. This approximate computed-torque controller
would have the form

                                                                           (6.2.2)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.2 Adaptive Control by a Computed-Torque Approach                       331

where the superscript “ˆ” denotes the estimated dynamics with the unknown
actual parameters replaced by the parameter estimates, Kv and Kp are control
gain matrices, qd is used to denote the desired trajectory, and the tracking
error e is defined by

                                                 e=qd-q.

We now illustrate the approximate computed-torque controller by examining
an example.

EXAMPLE 6.2–1: Approximate Computed-Torque Controller
    We wish to design and simulate an approximate computed-torque
    controller for the two-link arm given in Figure 6.2.1 (see Chapter 2 for
    the two-link revolute robot arm dynamics). Assuming that the friction is
    negligible, the link lengths are exactly known, and the masses m1 and m2
    are known to be in the regions 0.8±0.05 kg and 2.3±0.1 kg, respectively,
    a possible approximated computed-torque controller can be written as




                                    Figure 6.2.1: Two-link planar arm.




                                                                         (1)




                                                                         (2)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
332                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

where l1=l2=1 m and g is the gravitational constant. We choose 1=0.85 kg
and 2=2.2 kg since the actual values are assumed to be unknown. After
substituting the control law above into the two-link robot dynamics, we can
form the error system

                                                                                    (3)


where -1 (q) is the inverse of the inertia matrix M(q) with m1 and m2 replaced
by 1, and 2, respectively. The matrix W(q, , ), sometimes called the
regression matrix [Craig 1985], is a 2×2 matrix given by


                                                            ,                       (4)


where




The vector            called the parameter error vector, is a 2×1 vector given by


                                                                                    (5)


where




and




The associated tracking error 2×1 vector and 2×2 gain matrices in (3) are
given by


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.2 Adaptive Control by a Computed-Torque Approach                            333




   We cannot use the error system (3) to select the values for Kv and Kp with
standard linear control methods since the right-hand side of the error system
is composed of nonlinear functions of q, , and . For the approximate
computed-torque controller, simulation can be used to select the appropriate
values for Kv and Kp. A good starting point for selecting the values of Kp and
Kv for the approximate computed-torque controller is to use the same values,
as the computed-torque scheme would dictate, for a given desired damping
ratio and natural frequency.

For m1=0.8 kg and m2=2.3 kg, the approximate computed torque controller
(1)–(2) was simulated with q(0)= (0)=0, with the controller gains set at


                                                                                (6)


and with a desired trajectory of

                                          qd1=qd2=sin t.                        (7)

   The tracking error is depicted in Figure 6.2.2. As illustrated by these figures,
the tracking error remains bounded rather than going to zero. The reason
for this type of bounded tracking error performance is that the error system
given by (3) is constantly being excited by the dynamics on the right-hand
side of (3).
                                                                                 䊏

Adaptive Computed-Torque Controller
For unknown parametric quantities such as link masses or friction coefficients,
the approximate computed-torque controller simply substitutes a fixed estimate
   for the unknown parametric quantities. From Equation (3) in Example
6.2.1, one can clearly see that if the parameter error vector is equal to zero,
the tracking error can be shown to be asymptotically stable. For many
applications, we cannot assume that is equal to zero. For example, in the
case of an unknown payload mass attached to the end effector of a robot,
there will always be an unknown parametric quantity related to the payload
mass that would appear in the parameter error vector.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
334                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators




          Figure 6.2.2: Simulation of approximate computed-torque controller.



   The adaptive control strategy can, heuristically, be motivated by reasoning
that one could expect better tracking performance if the parameter estimate
was adjusted as the robot manipulator moves instead of always being a fixed
quantity. That is, it seems reasonable to attempt to change our parameter
estimates based on an adaptive update rule that would be a function of the
robot configuration and the tracking error. The question then becomes: How
do we formulate an adaptive control strategy, and how does this adaptive
update rule affect the stability of the tracking error? The answer to both of
these questions is that the adaptive update rule is formulated from the stability
analysis of the tracking error system. That is, we ensure stability of the tracking
error system by formulating the adaptive update rule and by analyzing the
stability of the tracking error system at the same time.
   The first adaptive control strategy that we will examine is the method
outlined in [Craig 1985]. The adaptive computed-torque controller is the
same as the approximate computed-torque controller (6.2.2) with the addition
of an adaptive update rule for adjusting the parameter estimates. This adaptive
controller is based on the fact that the parameters appear linearly in the
robot model (see Chapter 2). That is, the robot dynamics (6.2.1) can be
written in the form

                                                                                (6.2.3)

where W(q, , ) is an n×r matrix of known time functions and is an r×1
vector of unknown constant parameters. This property is crucial for the type
of adaptive control that Craig formulated in that it illustrates the separation
of unknown parameters and the known time functions. The reason that the


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.2 Adaptive Control by a Computed-Torque Approach                        335

robot dynamics can be separated in this form is that the robot dynamics are
linear in the parameters expressed in the vector form . This separation of
unknown parameters and known time functions will be used in the
formulation of the adaptive update rule and also in the stability analysis of
the tracking error system.
   The first step in the study of the adaptive computed-torque controller is
to form the tracking error system. Note that, by using (6.2.3), we may write
the robot dynamic Equation given by (6.2.1) as

                                                                       (6.2.4)

From [Craig 1985], the adaptive computed-torque controller is given by

                                                                       (6.2.5)

It is easy to see from our definition of the tracking error how (6.2.5) can be
written as

                                                                      (6.2.6)

By utilizing (6.2.3), (6.2.6) can be written as

                                                                       (6.2.7)

where is an n×1 vector used to represent a time-varying estimate of the
unknown constant parameters. Substituting (6.2.7) into (6.2.4), we can form
the tracking error system

                                                                       (6.2.8)

where the parameter error is

                                                                       (6.2.9)

Now for convenience, rewrite (6.2.8) in the state-space form

                                                                      (6.2.10)

where the tracking error vector is




and


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
336                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators




with In being the n×n identity matrix, and On being the n×n zero matrix.
   Now that the tracking error system has been formed, we use Lyapunov
stability analysis (see Chapter 1) to show that the tracking error vector e is
asymptotically stable with the right choice of adaptive update law. We first
select the positive-definite Lyapunov-like function

                                                                          (6.2.11)

where P is a 2n×2n positive-definite, constant, symmetric matrix, and Γ is a
diagonal, positive-definite r×r matrix. That is, Γ can be written as



where the γi’s are positive scalar constants.
  Differentiating (6.2.11) with respect to time yields

                                                                          (6.2.12)

It is important to note in (6.2.12) that we have used the fact that

                                                                          (6.2.13)

since Γ=ΓT. (Note that a scalar quantity can always be transposed.) Now,
substituting for e from (6.2.10) into (6.2.12) yields



                                                                          (6.2.14)


Combining terms in (6.2.14) and using the scalar transportation property
gives

                                                                          (6.2.15)


where Q is a positive-definite, symmetric matrix that satisfies the Lyapunov
equation

                                                                          (6.2.16)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.2 Adaptive Control by a Computed-Torque Approach                            337

    From Chapter 1 we note that for stability, it is always desirable to have
at least negative semidefinite; therefore, the choice of adaptation update rule
becomes obvious. Specifically, by substituting

                                                                         (6.2.17)

(6.2.15) becomes

                                                                         (6.2.18)

   To determine explicitly the type of stability, we must do further analysis;
however, note first that (6.2.17) gives the adaptive update rule for the parameter
estimate vector since is equal to zero. That is, by recalling that the actual
unknown parameters are constant, we can substitute (6.2.9) into (6.2.17) to
obtain the adaptive update rule:

                                                                         (6.2.19)

for the parameter estimate vector .
    Before examining the type of stability for the tracking error system, we
note that Craig modified the adaptation update rule in (6.2.19) to prevent a
circular argument in the stability analysis [Craig 1985]. Specifically, the
parameter estimates are forced to remain within some known region. That is,
if parameter estimates drift out of a known region, they are reset to within a
known region. By resetting the parameter estimates in “software,” we are
guaranteed that the parameter estimates remain bounded.
    We now detail the stability for the tracking error. Since      is negative
semidefinite and V is lower bounded by zero, V remains upper bounded in the
time interval [O, ∞); furthermore,

                                                                         (6.2.20)

where V∞ is a positive scalar constant. Since V is upper bounded, it is obvious
from the definition of V given in (6.2.11) that e and are bounded, which
also means that q, and are bounded. Note that we have already assumed
that is bounded, and we will always assume that the desired trajectory and
its first two derivatives are bounded.
    Now, from the robot Equation (6.2.1), it is clear that

                                                                         (6.2.21)

therefore, is bounded since and τ depend only on the bounded quantities
q, , and . If is bounded, (6.2.10) shows that is bounded. Since is
bounded, we can state from (6.2.18) that is bounded. Therefore, since V is


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
338                                        Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

lower bounded by zero, is negative semidefinite, and             is bounded, then by
Barbalat’s lemma (see Chapter 1),




which means that by the Rayleigh-Ritz Theorem (see Chapter 1)


                                                                            (6.2.22)



                       Table 6.2.1: Adaptive Computed-Torque Controller




   The information given in (6.2.22) informs us that the tracking error vector
e is asymptotically stable. But what of the parameter error ? Does it also
converge to zero? From our analysis, all we can say about the parameter
error is that it remains bounded if -1(q) exists. Indeed, this places a restriction
on the parameter update law given in (6.2.19). That is, we must use the
parameter resetting method discussed earlier to ensure that poor parameter


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.2 Adaptive Control by a Computed-Torque Approach                                339




        Figure 6.2.3: Block diagram of the adaptive computed-torque controller.



estimates do not cause the inverse of      (q) to explode. In [Craig 1985] a
possible method for ensuring that the parameter estimates and -1(q) remain
bounded is outlined; furthermore, he shows how this method does not interfere
with the stability result delineated by (6.2.22). We will not discuss this
parameter estimate resetting method and the resulting stability proof since we
will show later in this chapter how Slotine and Li used a more judicious
choice of Lyapunov function to remove the need for resetting the parameter
estimates, and at the same time remove the need for acceleration measurements
in the regression matrix W (q, , )! The adaptive computed-torque controller
is summarized in Table 6.2.1 and depicted in Figure 6.2.3.
    We now present an example to illustrate how Table 6.2.1 can be used to
generate adaptive controllers for robotic manipulators.

EXAMPLE 6.2–2: Adaptive Computed-Torque Controller
    It is desired to design and simulate the adaptive computed-torque
    controller given in Table 6.2.1 for the two-link arm given in Figure 6.2.1.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
340                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

Assuming that the friction is negligible and that the link lengths are exactly
known, the adaptive computed-torque controller can be written in the same
form as that given in Example 6.2.1, with the exception that we must find
the update rules for 1 and 2. That is, we use Equations (1) and (2) in
Example 6.2.1 for the joint torque control and then formulate the update rule
for m1 and m2 according to Table 6.2.1.

For simplicity, in this example we select the servo gains as

                                                                               (1)

where kv and kp are positive, scalar constants and for this case In is the
2×2 identity matrix. We propose that the matrix P in Table 6.2.1 be
selected as


                                                                               (2)


Note that P is symmetric, and that it is positive definite if kv is selected
to be greater than 1 (see the Gerschgorin Theorem in Chapter 1). To
see if our selection of P gives a positive-definite Q, perform the matrix
operation

                                                                               (3)



                                                                               (4)


Since we have already restricted kv>1, it can be verified that Q is a positive
definite, symmetric matrix. We note here that the process of finding a positive
definite, symmetric P and Q for the general Lyapunov approach is not always
an easy task.

Now that we have found an appropriate P, we can formulate the adaptive
update rule given in Table 6.2.1. The associated parameter estimate vector is




with update rules



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.3 Adaptive Control by an Inertia-Related Approach                          341



                                                                              (5)


and


                                                                              (6)


where




the Pi’s are defined in (2), and the quantities forming the regression matrix
Wii’s are found in Example 6.2.1.
    For m1=0.8 kg and m2=2.3 kg, this adaptive computed-torque controller
was simulated with kv=50, kp=125, γ1=500, γ2=500, 1 (0)=0.85, 2(0)=2.2,
and with the same desired trajectory and initial joint conditions used in Example
6.2.1. The tracking error and mass estimates are depicted in Figure 6.2.4. As
illustrated by this figure, the tracking error goes to zero, and the parameter
estimates remain bounded as predicted by the theory. Note that we did not
take any special precautions in this simulation to ensure the existence of -
1
  (q). We could have developed some sort of procedure to guarantee that -
1
  (q) existed; however, this is not really needed since we show in the next
section how to eliminate this restriction.
                                                                               䊏


6.3        Adaptive Control by an Inertia-Related
           Approach

In Section 6.2 we showed how adaptive control can be used to compensate
for parametric uncertainties. This led Craig to develop the adaptive
computed-torque controller. We also gave the two restrictions required for the



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
342                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators




           Figure 6.2.4: Simulation of the adaptive computed-torque controller.



implementation of the adaptive computed-torque controller [i.e., the need for
measuring and ensuring that -1(q) exists]. Both of these restrictions can be
quite cumbersome. For example, most industrial robots have only position
and velocity sensors, and since differentiation of velocity is not desirable in
general, we must add additional costly sensors for measuring .
Furthermore, if large, unknown payloads relative to the manipulator’s weight
are being lifted by the manipulator, it may be extremely difficult to ensure
that -1(q) exists.
   After researchers reexamined the structure of the adaptive computedtorque
controller, they began to wonder if all the available information about the
robot manipulator was being used in designing adaptive control schemes.
That is, are all the properties inherent to a mechanical manipulator being
exploited? In [Arimoto and Miyazaki 1986] a proportionalderivative (PD)
feedback controller with gravity compensation is proposed. It should be noted
that this controller is not a product of the feedback linearization approach.
Rather, this controller employs an inertia-related Lyapunov function in the
stability analysis which utilizes physical properties inherent to a mechanical
manipulator. After reexamining the adaptive computed-torque controller,
one can see that the Lyapunov function used in the stability analysis is not
inertia-related but is somewhat arbitrary.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.3 Adaptive Control by an Inertia-Related Approach                         343

Examination of a PD Plus Gravity Controller
One method [Slotine 1988] of motivating a PD plus gravity controller [Arimoto
and Miyazaki 1986] is to write the manipulator dynamics in the conservation-
of-energy form

                                                                         (6.3.1)

where the left-hand side of (6.3.1) is the derivative of the manipulator kinetic
energy, and the right-hand side of (6.3.1) represents the power supplied from
the actuators minus the power dissipated due to gravity and friction. Note
that the Coriolis and centripetal terms are accounted for in (6.3.1) since
these terms are related to the time derivative of the inertia matrix.
   Suppose that we now want to design a constant set-point controller (i.e.,
  d=0) for the system given in the conservation of energy form (6.3.1). To
begin, we select the inertia-related Lyapunov function

                                                                         (6.3.2)

Since a Lyapunov function can be thought of heuristically as an energy function,
this Lyapunov function seems quite reasonable. That is, the Lyapunov function
is composed of the kinetic energy of the robotic manipulator system
and an additional energy damping term                   . This energy damping
term can be thought of as using physical springs so that the manipulator will
be better behaved.
    Differentiating (6.3.2) with respect to time yields

                                                                        (6.3.3)

Substituting (6.3.1) into (6.3.3), we have

                                                                        (6.3.4)

since we are solving the set-point control problem. Since it is desirable for
to be at least negative semidefinite, the control

                                                                         (6.3.5)

is motivated by the form of (6.3.4). That is, substituting (6.3.5) into (6.3.4)
yields

                                                                        (6.3.6)

  The analysis above illustrates that V is decreasing for all time except for
equal to zero. We now use this information to illustrate that the desired set


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
344                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

point qd is achieved. That is, if =0, then =0, and =0; hence therefore, for
  = =0, we can utilize (6.2.1) and (6.3.5) to write the closed-loop system in
the form Kpe=0, which implies that e=0. From Chapter 1, LaSalle’s Theorem
can now be used to show that the tracking error e is asymptotically stable.

Adaptive Inertia-Related Controller
Although the controller given in (6.3.5) utilizes the conservation of energy
property, it has two disadvantages. First, the controller merely ensures that
the manipulator reaches a desired set point. In general, a robot control designer
must ensure that the manipulator tracks a desired time-varying trajectory.
Second, the controller requires exact knowledge of any parameters associated
with the robot manipulator model since the gravity and friction terms are
included in the control law (6.3.5).
   In [Slotine and Li 1985 (a)] the conservation of energy formulation given
in (6.3.1) is exploited to design an adaptive controller for the trajectory-
following problem. This controller can be motivated in much the same way
as our treatment of the PD plus gravity controller. In other words, we use the
stability analysis to guide us in finding an adaptive controller. Since we are
designing an adaptive trajectory-following controller, we should select a
Lyapunov function that is a function of the tracking error and the parameter
error. Slotine selected the inertia-related Lyapunov-like function

                                                                           (6.3.7)

where

                                                                           (6.3.8)

with Γ defined as in (6.2.11), Λ defined as positive-definite, diagonal matrix
such that




and defined as in (6.2.9). The auxiliary signal r(t) given in (6.3.8) may be
considered as a filtered tracking error.
  After differentiating (6.3.7) with respect to time, we have

                                                                           (6.3.9)

From (6.3.9) it is clear that we must substitute for the variable ; therefore,
we must write the robot equation in terms of the variable r. Using (6.2.1), the
robot dynamics can be rewritten as


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.3 Adaptive Control by an Inertia-Related Approach                           345

                                                                          (6.3.10)

where

                                                                         (6.3.11)

and Y(·) is an n×r matrix of known time functions. This is the same type of
parametric separation that was used in the formulation of the adaptive
computed-torque controller; however, note that Y(·) is not a function of joint
acceleration !
   Substituting (6.3.10) into (6.3.9) gives

                                                                         (6.3.12)

Applying the skew-symmetric property (see Chapter 2), we can write (6.3.12)
as

                                                                          (6.3.13)

Again, the stability analysis has guided us to a choice of torque controller
and adaptive update rule. That is, if we select the torque control to be

                                                                          (6.3.14)

(6.3.13) becomes

                                                                          (6.3.15)

By selecting the adaptive update rule as

                                                                          (6.3.16)

(6.3.15) becomes

                                                                          (6.3.17)

   We now detail the type of stability for the tracking error. First, since in
(6.3.17) is negative semidefinite, we can state that V in (6.3.7) is upper bounded.
Using the facts that V is upper bounded and that M(q) is a positive-definite
matrix (see Chapter 2), we can state that r and are bounded. From the
definition of r given in (6.3.8), we can use standard linear control arguments
to state that e and (and hence q and ) are bounded. Since e, , r, and
are bounded, we can use (6.3.10) and (6.3.14) to show that (and hence


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
346                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

obtained by differentiating (6.3.17)) is bounded. Second, note that since M(q)
is lower bounded, we can state that V given in (6.3.7) is lower bounded. Since
   is lower bounded, V is negative semidefinite, and is bounded, we can use
Barbalat’s lemma (see Chapter 1) to state that

                                                                          (6.3.18)


which means that by the Rayleigh-Ritz Theorem (see Chapter 1)

                                                                          (6.3.19)


Note that (6.3.8) is a stable first-order differential equation driven by the
“input” r; therefore, by standard linear control arguments and (6.3.19), we
can write

                                                                          (6.3.20)

   This result informs us that the tracking errors e and are asymptotically
stable. Again, from the analysis above, all we can say about the parameter
error is that it remains bounded. Later, we will show that the parameter
error also converges to zero under certain conditions on the desired trajectory.
The adaptive controller derived above is summarized in Table 6.3.1 and
depicted in Figure 6.3.1.

After glancing through Table 6.3.1, we can see that the restrictions with regard
to the adaptive computed-torque controller have been removed. Specifically,
for the adaptive inertia-related controller, we do not require measurements of
acceleration or any ad hoc adjustment of the parameter estimates to ensure
  -1
     (q) that exists.
   We now present an example to illustrate how Table 6.3.1 can be used to
design adaptive controllers for robotic manipulators.

EXAMPLE 6.3–1: Adaptive Inertia-Related Controller
    We wish to design and simulate the adaptive inertia-related controller given
    in Table 6.3.1 for the two-link arm given in Figure 6.2.1. Assuming that
    the friction is negligible and the link lengths are exactly known, the adaptive
    inertia-related torque controller can be written as

                                                                                (1)

and


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.3 Adaptive Control by an Inertia-Related Approach                                 347

                          Table 6.3.1: Adaptive Inertia-Related Controller




          Figure 6.3.1: Block diagram of the adaptive inertia-related controller.



                                                                                    (2)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
348                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

     In the expression for the control torques, the regression matrix Y(·) is given
by


                                                                                (3)


where

                                                                                (4)




                                                                                (5)




                                                                                (6)

and


                                                                                (7)


  Formulating the adaptive update rule as given in Table 6.3.1, the associated
parameter estimate vector is




with the adaptive update rules

                                                                               (8)

and

                                                                               (9)

   For m1=0.8 kg and m2=2.3 kg, the adaptive inertia-related controller was
simulated with kv1=kv2=10, λ1=λ2=2.5, λ1=λ2=20, 1(0)=0, 2(0)=0, and with



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.4 Adaptive Controllers Based on Passivity                                         349

the same desired trajectory and initial joint conditions as given in Example
6.2.1. The tracking error and mass estimates are depicted in Figure 6.3.2. As
illustrated by the figure, the tracking error is asymptotically stable, and the
parameter estimates remain bounded.
                                                                                     䊏




             Figure 6.3.2: Simulation of the adaptive inertia-related controller.




6.4 Adaptive Controllers Based on Passivity

In recent years, many authors have developed adaptive control schemes that
are different with regard to the torque control law or the adaptive update
rule. To unify some of the approaches, general adaptive control strategies
have been developed based on the passivity approach (see [Ortega and Spong
1988] and [Brogliato et al. 1990]). In this section we illustrate how the
passivity approach can be used to develop a class of torque control laws and
adaptive update rules for the control of robot manipulators.

Passive Adaptive Controller
First, we define an auxiliary filtered tracking error variable that is similar
to that defined for the adaptive inertia-related controller. That is, we define



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
350                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

our tracking variable to be

                                                                           (6.4.1)

where


                                                                           (6.4.2)


and s is the Laplace transform variable. In (6.4.2), the n×n gain matrix K(s) is
chosen such that H(s) is a strictly proper, stable transfer function matrix. The
reason for this restriction on H(s) will be clear after we analyze the stability
of the adaptive controller that is presented later in this section.

As in the preceding sections, our adaptive control strategies have been centered
around the ability to separate the known time functions from the unknown
constant parameters. Therefore, we use the expressions given in (6.4.1) and
(6.4.2) to define



                                                                           (6.4.3)



where in this control formulation, Z(·) is a known n×r regression matrix.
[Note the standard abuse of notation in (6.4.3), where K(s)e is used to
represent the inverse Laplace transform of K(s) convolved with e(t).] It is
important to note that K(s) can be selected so that Z(·) and r do not depend
on measurement of . Indeed, if K(s) is selected such that H(s) has a relative
degree of 1 [Kailath 1980], Z(·) and r will not depend on .
   The adaptive control formulation given in this section is called the passivity
approach because the mapping of -r → Z(.) is constructed to be a passive
mapping. That is, we construct an adaptive update rule such that


                                                                           (6.4.4)


is satisfied for all time and for some positive scalar constant ß. This passivity
concept is used in analyzing the stability of the error system, as we shall
show. However, for now let us illustrate the use of (6.4.4) in generating an
adaptive update rule.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.4 Adaptive Controllers Based on Passivity                                351

EXAMPLE 6.4–1: Adaptive Update Rule by Passivity
    Let us show that the adaptive update rule

                                                                            (1)

    satisfies the inequality given by (6.4.4). Note that G is defined as in
    (6.2.11).
       First rewrite (1) in the form

                                                                            (2)

    where we have used the fact that G is a diagonal matrix. Substituting (2)
    into (6.4.4) gives


                                                                            (3)


    Since Γ is a constant matrix, we can use the product rule to rewrite (3) as


                                                                            (4)


    or

                                                                            (5)

    From (5) it is now obvious that if ß is selected as

                                                                            (6)

    then the passivity integral given in (6.4.4) is satisfied for the adaptive
    update rule given in (1).
                                                                             䊏

Now that we have a feeling for how the passivity integral (6.4.4) can be used
to generate adaptive update rules, we use the concept of passivity to analyze
the stability of a class of adaptive controllers. For this class of adaptive
controllers, the torque control is given by

                                                                        (6.4.5)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
352                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

   Note that many types of torque controllers can be generated from (6.4.5)
by selecting different transfer function matrices for K(s) in the definition of r.
That is, for different K(s), we have different types of feedback because the
feedback term Kvr will change accordingly.
   To form the error system, rewrite the robot dynamics (6.2.1) in terms of
the tracking error variable r and the regression matrix Z(·) as

                                                                           (6.4.6)

Substituting (6.4.5) into (6.4.6) yields the tracking error system

                                                                           (6.4.7)

    For analyzing the stability of this system, we use the Lyapunov-like function

                                                                           (6.4.8)

[Ortega and Spong 1988]. Note that V is positive since the parameter estimate
update rule is constructed to guarantee (6.4.4). That is, if (6.4.4) is satisfied,
then

                                                                           (6.4.9)


therefore, V is a positive scalar function. Differentiating (6.4.8) with respect
to time gives

                                                                          (6.4.10)

Substituting (6.4.7) into (6.4.10) yields

                                                                          (6.4.11)

Utilizing the skew-symmetric property (see Chapter 2) allows one to write

                                                                          (6.4.12)

   We now detail the type of stability for the tracking error. First note from
(6.4.12) that we can place the new upper bound on :

                                                                          (6.4.13)

which can also be written as



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.4 Adaptive Controllers Based on Passivity                                    353


                                                                           (6.4.14)


Multiplying (6.4.14) by -1 and integrating the left-hand side of (6.4.14) yields

                                                                           (6.4.15)


Since is negative semidefinite as delineated by (6.4.12), we can state that V
is a nonincreasing function that is upper bounded by V(0). By recalling that
M(q) is lower bounded, as delineated by the positive-definite property of the
inertia matrix (see Chapter 2), we can state that V given in (6.4.8) is lower
bounded by zero. Since V is nonincreasing, upper bounded by V(0), and lower
bounded by zero, we can write (6.4.15) as


                                                                           (6.4.16)

or

                                                                           (6.4.17)


The bound delineated by (6.4.17) informs us that                (see Chapter 1),
which means that the filtered tracking r is bounded in the “special” way
given by (6.4.17).
   To establish a stability result for the position tracking error e, we establish
the transfer function relationship between the position tracking error and
the filtered tracking error r. From (6.4.1) we can state that

                                                                           (6.4.18)

where H(s) is as defined in (6.4.2). Since H(s) is a strictly proper, asymptotically
stable transfer function matrix and              , we can use Theorem 1.4.7 in
Chapter 1 to state that

                                                                           (6.4.19)

    The result above informs us that the position tracking error is
asymptotically stable. In accordance with the theoretical development above,
all we can say about the velocity tracking error is that it is bounded.
    The passivity-based controller is summarized in Table 6.4.1. From this
table we can see that the passivity approach gives a general class of torque


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
354                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

control laws. We illustrate this concept with some examples that unify some
of the research in adaptive control.


EXAMPLE 6.4–2: Passivity of the Adaptive Inertia-Related
Controller
    In this example we show how the adaptive inertia-related controller can
    be derived using passivity concepts. First, note that by defining

                                                                               (1)

    and

                                                                               (2)


    in Table 6.4.1, we obtain the torque control law

                                                                               (3)

    where

                                                                               (4)


    This corresponds to the definition given in (6.3.11); therefore, using (2),
    we have obtained the adaptive inertia-related torque controller as given
    in Table 6.3.1.
       The last item to check is whether the adaptive inertia-related update
    rule satisfies the passivity integral given in Table 6.4.1. From Table 6.3.1
    the adaptive inertia-related update rule can be written as

                                                                               (5)

    for the choice of K(s) given in (1). After reexamining Example 6.4.1 it is
    now obvious that we have derived the adaptive inertia-related controller
    with the passivity approach.
                                                                                䊏




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.4 Adaptive Controllers Based on Passivity                                   355


                         Table 6.4.1: Passive Class of Adaptive Controllers




EXAMPLE 6.4-3: PID Torque Control Law
In Example 6.4.2 the torque control law was shown to be

                                                                               (1)

   This torque controller is a proportional-derivative (PD) feedback controller
since we are using e and in the feedback portion of the control. It is now
desired to find the choice of K(s) in Table 6.4.1 to give a proportional-integral-
derivative (PID) type of torque controller of the form

                                                                               (2)


Using Table 6.4.1, we can select

                                                                               (3)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
356                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

where




␭i’s are positive scalar constants, ␺i’s are positive scalar constants, Kp= Kv⌳,
and KI=Kv⌿. Now we must check to verify that H(s) is indeed a strictly proper,
stable transfer function matrix. For this choice of K(s) in Table 6.4.1, we can
write


                                                                                (4)



Note that since ⌳ and ⌿ have been selected to be diagonal positive-definite
matrices, H(s) is a decoupled transfer function matrix. That is, the transfer
function for the ith system is

                                                                                (5)


   Since the ␭i’s and ␺’s are positive, H(s) is a strictly proper, stable transfer
function matrix.
                                                                                䊏
General Adaptive Update Rule
As mentioned earlier, the adaptive control scheme outlined in Table 6.4.1
allows one to formulate different adaptive update laws by ensuring that the
proposed update satisfies the passivity integral given in (6.4.4). Landau
proposed the general update rule (which satisfies the passivity integral)


                                                                          (6.4.20)


where Fp is an r×r positive definite, constant matrix, and FI(t) is an r×r positive
definite matrix kernel whose Laplace transform is a positive real transfer
function matrix with a pole at s=0 [Landau 1979].
    By utilizing this general update law, many types of adaptation may be
designed. All we need to keep in mind is that the conditions on FI(t) and Fp
must be met. One possible adaptive scheme that comes directly from (6.4.20)
is the proportional + integral (PI) adaptation scheme. The PI update law is the
same as that given by (6.4.20), with


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.5 Persistency of Excitation                                                 357

                                          FI(t)=K1,                       (6.4.21)

where K1 is a diagonal, constant positive-definite matrix. It has been pointed
out in [Landau 1979] that with regard to adaptive model following, PI
adaptation has shown a significant improvement over integral adaptation.
Therefore, this type of adaptation might be beneficial for the tracking control
of robot manipulators.


6.5 Persistency of Excitation

For the adaptive controllers presented in the previous sections the tracking
error has been shown to be asymptotically stable; however, all that could be
said about the parameter error was that it was bounded. In general, parameter
identification will occur in adaptive control systems only if certain conditions
on the regression matrix can be established. Specifically, several researchers
[Morgan and Narendra 1977], [Anderson 1977] have studied the asymptotic
stability of adaptive control systems similar to the ones we have presented in
this chapter. For example, parameter error convergence can be established
for the adaptive inertia-related controller if the regression matrix Y(·) satisfies


                                                                           (6.5.1)



for all t0, where α, ß, and ρ are all positive scalars. Furthermore, since the
tracking error is asymptotically stable, we can rewrite (6.5.1) as


                                                                           (6.5.2)



where the arguments q and q have been replaced by qd and d, respectively.
    The condition given in (6.5.2) informs us that if Y(·) varies sufficiently
over the interval given by ρ so that the entire r-dimensional parameter space
is spanned, we know the parameter error converges to zero. This amounts to
a condition on the desired trajectory such that all parameters will be identified
after a sufficient learning interval. This condition can be helpful in formulating
desired trajectories to ensure that parameters such as friction coefficients or
payload masses are identified. We now illustrate the meaning of a persistently
exciting trajectory with some examples.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
358                                             Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

EXAMPLE 6.5–1: Lack of Persistency of Excitation for a One-Link Robot
Arm
We wish to investigate the persistency of excitation conditions for the one-link
robot arm given in Figure 6.5.1. The dynamics of this robot arm will be taken
to be


                                                                                     (1)




                                   Figure 6.5.1: One-link revolute arm.



where the term b is used to denote the positive scalar representing the dynamic
coefficient of friction. We assume that this robot arm is in the plane not
affected by the gravitational force and that m and b are unknown positive
constants.


a. Adaptive Controller
By using Table 6.3.1, the adaptive inertia-related controller for the dynamics
(1) can be shown to be given by


                                                                                     (2)


   In the expression above for the control torque, the regression matrix Y(·) is
given by


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.5 Persistency of Excitation                                                 359

                                                                                (3)

where



The corresponding parameter estimate vector is given by




     We can formulate the adaptive update rule given in Table 6.3.1 as

                                                                                (4)

and

                                                                                (5)



b. Persistency of Excitation
With this adaptive controller it is desired to show analytically that qd= 1-e-2t is
not persistently exciting. From (6.5.2), the integrand of the persistently exciting
condition for this example is given by




or


                                                                                (6)


   Multiplying the first column of YT(·)Y(·) by and adding it to the second
column of YT(·)Y(·) gives


                                                                               (7)


   Since the matrix RYY has the same range space as the matrix YT(·)Y(·), we
can see from (7) that the range space of the matrix YT(·)Y(·) will always be
one-dimensional; therefore, the persistent excitation condition does not hold
for


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
360                                           Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

                                              qd=1-e-2t.

                                                                                    䊏

EXAMPLE 6.5–2: Persistency of Excitation for a One-Link Arm

a. Desired Trajectory with Single Frequency
With the adaptive controller in Example 6.5.1, we would like to show by
simulation that qd=sin t is not persistently exciting. For m=1 kg and b=1 N-m-
s, the adaptive inertia-related controller was simulated with




                           Figure 6.5.2: Lack of persistency of excitation.



                                                                                   (1)


with initial conditions of

                                                                                   (2)

The tracking error and the parameter estimates are depicted in Figure 6.5.2.
As anticipated, the tracking error is asymptotically stable, and the parameter
estimates remain bounded. Note that and          do not go to zero since the
desired trajectory is not persistently exciting.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.6 Composite Adaptive Controller                                           361




                                 Figure 6.5.3: Persistency of excitation.




b. Desired Trajectory with Multiple Frequencies
With the adaptive controller in Example 6.5.1, we desire to show by simulation
that qd=sin t+cos 3t is persistently exciting. The adaptive controller given in
Example 6.5.1 should be simulated under the same conditions as those given
in part (a) of this example except for the change in the desired trajectory. The
tracking error and the parameter error are depicted in Figure 6.5.3. As
illustrated by the figure, the tracking error is asymptotically stable, and the
parameter estimates remain bounded. Note that and              converge to the
exact values of b and m, respectively. This is because the desired trajectory is
persistently exciting.


                                                                             䊏

6.6 Composite Adaptive Controller

In both the adaptive computed-torque and the adaptive inertia-related control
strategies, we have shown that the tracking error is asymptotically stable and
the parameter error is bounded. It was then illustrated that if a persistency of
excitation condition holds, the parameter error converges to zero. In some
robotic applications it may not be practical to utilize a persistently exciting


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
362                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

trajectory; therefore, we are motivated to redesign the adaptive control strategy
to achieve parameter identification.
   In this section we show how the adaptive controller given in Section 6.3
can be modified to ensure asymptotic convergence of both the tracking error
and the parameter error [Slotine and Li 1985(b)]. The asymptotic convergence
of the parameter error is shown to hold if a condition on the filtered regression
matrix holds. This condition, often called the infinite integral condition, is
less restrictive than the persistency of excitation condition.
   The procedure for designing the new adaptive controller can be out-lined
as follows. First, a filtered regression matrix is formed from torque
measurements. Second, it is shown how this filtered regression matrix can be
used to formulate a least-squares estimator for estimating the unknown
parameters. Finally, the adaptive update rule in Table 6.3.1 is modified to
include an additional least-squares estimator term.

Torque Filtering
We now show how the regression matrix that is formed from a torque
measurement can be filtered to eliminate the need for acceleration
measurements. From Section 6.2 we can write the robot Equation (6.2.1) in
the following form:


                                                                           (6.6.1)


The middle expression in (6.6.1) is written in the form

                                                                           (6.6.2)

where

                                                                           (6.6.3)

and

                                                                           (6.6.4)

The reason for writing the robot equation in the form given by (6.6.2) is that
this equation has now been separated in a way that allows to be filtered out
or removed. That is, by filtering (6.6.2), we have


                                                                           (6.6.5)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.6 Composite Adaptive Controller                                                363

where f is the impulse response of a linear stable, strictly proper filter, and the
* is used to denote the convolution operation. For example, we could use the
first-order filter given by
                                                                             (6.6.6)


where a is a positive scalar constant. By using the property of convolution

                                                                             (6.6.7)

    we can rewrite (6.6.5) as

                                                                             (6.6.8)

  After substituting the expressions for h and g, note that has been filtered
out. That is, the explicit expression for if is given by


                                                                             (6.6.9)


where         is the impulse response of a proper, stable filter; for example,

                                                                            (6.6.10)

By linearity, the unknown parameters can still be separated out with regard
to (6.6.9). That is, (6.6.9) can be rewritten as

                                                                            (6.6.11)

where Wf(·) is an n×r filtered regression matrix, and ϕ is an r×1 vector of
unknown parameters. We now use an example to show how torque filtering
can be used to eliminate the need for acceleration measurements.

EXAMPLE 6.6–1: Torque Filtering of a One-Link Robot Arm
Using the dynamics of the one-link robot arm given in Example 6.5.1, it is
desired to find the filter regression matrix Wf(q, ) given in (6.6.11), where
the linear filter is given by

                                                                                 (1)

or, in the time domain,


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
364                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

                                          f(t)=e-t.                            (2)

     Using (6.6.9), the filtered torque expression for the one-link arm is given
by

                                                                               (3)

where

                                                                               (4)

The expression in (3) is used to separate the known functions from the unknown
constants into the form

                                                                               (5)

where the filtered regression matrix and parameter vector are given by

                                                                               (6)

and

                                                                               (7)
                                                                                䊏

   The important concept to realize in the regression matrix formulation given
by (6.6.11) is that the quantities τf and Wf(q, )are known or assumed to be
measurable; however, ϕ is unknown. To estimate ϕ, we define the estimate of
the filtered torque based on the estimate of the unknown parameters, that is,

                                                                          (6.6.12)

We can now define the measurable quantity

                                                                          (6.6.13)


where

                                                                          (6.6.14)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.6 Composite Adaptive Controller                                           365

   The use of f is crucial in the development of the least-squares estimator
that is developed in the next section. We can easily see how f is measurable
by writing (6.6.14) in the form

                                                                       (6.6.15)


As explained earlier, f and Wf(·) are assumed to be known or measurable;
therefore, all we need is the parameter estimate term [i.e., in (6.6.15)] for if
to be known. Later, we generate an adaptive update rule that will give us the
parameter estimate term in (6.6.15). So for now we will assume that f is
known.

Least-Squares Estimation
Least-squares estimation methods have been used in many types of parameter
identification schemes [Astrom and Wittenmark 1989]. It turns out that this
type of estimation method extracts the maximum amount of parametric
information even when the desired trajectory is not persistently exciting. This
is an important fact to realize when designating adaptive control systems for
robot manipulators because in many robot applications, the persistency of
excitation condition will not be valid. Therefore, least-squares estimation
offers an attractive solution to the design of adaptive controllers for robot
manipulators.
    We now show how the least-squares estimation method can be used to
generate an adaptive update rule. First, define the least-squares update rule

                                                                       (6.6.16)

where

                                                                       (6.6.17)

and P is an r×r time-varying symmetric matrix.
  With this least-squares estimation method, if an “infinite integral” condition
holds, the parameter error converges to zero. Specifically, if


                                                                       (6.6.18)

holds, then

                                                                       (6.6.19)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
366                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

   As pointed out in [Slotine and Li 1985(b)], this infinite integral condition is
a weaker condition than the persistency of excitation condition. That is, in
practical robot applications, (6.6.18) can often be validated.

EXAMPLE 6.6–2: Least-Squares Estimator for a One-Link Robot Arm
Using the dynamics of the one-link robot arm given in Example 6.5.1, it is
desired to find the least-squares estimator given by (6.6.16) and (6.6.17).
Since the number of unknown parameters is two, define the matrix P to be


                                                                               (1)


    Utilizing the filtered regression matrix from Example 6.6.1, we have

                                                                               (2)


where




Using (6.6.17), it is easy to see that the matrix P should be updated in the
following manner:

                                                                               (3)



                                                                               (4)


and

                                                                               (5)


Now using (6.6.16), the parameter update rules are

                                                                               (6)

and


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.6 Composite Adaptive Controller                                               367

                                                                                   (7)

    where, from (6.6.16), ␶f is given by

                                                                                   (8)

                                                                               䊏
   For insight into how the least-squares estimation method extracts parameter
information, we now show how (6.6.18) is obtained. Utilizing (6.6.13) and
the fact that the parameters are constant, we write (6.6.16) as

                                                                            (6.6.20)

                                          –1
Using the matrix identity =–P                  P we can write (6.6.17) as

                                                                            (6.6.21)

Substituting (6.6.21) into (6.6.20) yields the differential equation

                                                                            (6.6.22)

We claim that

                                                                            (6.6.23)

is the solution to (6.6.22). This fact can be verified by substituting (6.6.23)
into the right-hand and left-hand sides of (6.6.22). That is, we obtain

                                                                            (6.6.24)

therefore, (6.6.23) is the solution. Now from (6.6.21) it is easy to see that the
solution for P is given by


                                                                            (6.6.25)

  After examining (6.6.25), we can intuitively see that if the infinite integral
condition is satisfied, then

                                                                            (6.6.26)
and
                                                                            (6.6.27)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
368                                              Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

  Now if (6.6.26) holds, we can see from (6.6.23) that the parameter error
converges to zero. This proof is detailed in [Li and Slotine 1987].

Composite Adaptive Controller
The composite adaptive controller is the same as the controller given in Table
6.3.1, with the exception of a modification to the adaptive update rule. This
modification is given by

                                                                                             (6.6.28)

   To prove that the tracking error and the parameter error both converge to
zero, start with the Lyapunov-like function,

                                                                                             (6.6.29)

Differentiating (6.6.29) with respect to time yields

                                                                                             (6.6.30)

From the control law given in Table 6.3.1 and the development in Section
6.3, we can form the tracking error system

                                                                                             (6.6.31)

Substituting (6.6.31) into (6.6.30) yields

                                                                                             (6.6.32)

                                                –1
After substituting               in (6.6.28),        in (6.6.21), and   f   in (6.6.13) into (6.6.32),
we have

                                                                                             (6.6.33)

   We now detail the type of stability for the tracking error and the parameter
error. First, since in (6.6.33) is at least negative semidefinite in the form

                                                                                             (6.6.34)

we can state that V in (6.6.29) is bounded. Since V is bounded, M(q) is a
positive-definite matrix, and P-1 satisfies the condition given by (6.6.27), we
can state that r and are bounded. Furthermore, from the definition of r
given in (6.3.8), we can use standard linear control arguments to state that e


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.6 Composite Adaptive Controller                                             369

and e (and hence q and ) are bounded. We can now use the same arguments
presented in Section 6.4 to show that             . Given that           , we can
determine a stability result for the position tracking error by establishing the
transfer function relationship between the position tracking error and the filtered
tracking error r. From (6.3.8), we can state that

                                                                          (6.6.35)

where s is the Laplace transform variable,

                                                                          (6.6.36)

I is the n×n identity matrix, and ⌳ is an n×n positive-definite matrix. Since
G(s) is a strictly proper, asymptotically stable transfer function and
we can use Theorem 1.4.7 in Chapter 1 to state that

                                                                          (6.6.37)

Second, since is at least negative semidefinite, we know that V must be
nonincreasing, and hence is upper bounded by V(0). Furthermore, by the
infinite integral assumption, we have concluded in (6.6.27) that

                                                                          (6.6.38)

Since the term

                                                                          (6.6.39)

   in V given in (6.6.29) is upper bounded by V(0), we can see that for (6.6.38)
to hold, we must have




Therefore, from the argument above, the position tracking error and the
parameter error are asymptotically stable for the composite adaptive controller
outlined in Table 6.6.1. In accordance with the theoretical development above,
all we can say about the velocity tracking error is that it is bounded; however,
Barbalat’s lemma can be invoked to illustrate that the velocity tracking error
is also asymptotically stable (see Problem 6.6–3). We now use an example to
illustrate how the composite adaptive controller is formulated.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
370                                          Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators


                             Table 6.6.1: Composite Adaptive Controller




EXAMPLE 6.6–3: Composite Adaptive Controller for a One-Link Robot Arm
It is desired to formulate the composite adaptive controller for the one-link
robot arm given in Figure 6.5.1. The torque control law is the same as that
given by Equation (2) in Example 6.5.1; therefore, all that need be done is the
formulation of the composite adaptive update rule. From Table 6.6.1, the
composite parameter update rules are

                                                                                  (1)

and
                                                                                  (2)
where r is defined in (6.3.8), Y11, Y12 are defined in Example 6.5.1, and P1, P2,
P3, Wf11, Wf12, f are defined in Example 6.6.2.
                                                                               䊏



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.7 Robustness of Adaptive Controllers                                        371


6.7 Robustness of Adaptive Controllers

All of the adaptive control schemes discussed ensure asymptotic tracking of a
desired reference trajectory for the robot manipulator dynamics; however, in
reality we know that there will always be disturbances in any electromechanical
system. A simplistic way to take into account some sort of disturbance effect
is to add a bounded disturbance term to the manipulator dynamic equation.
With this additive disturbance term the robot equation becomes

                                                                          (6.7.1)

where Td is an n×1 vector that represents an additive disturbance.
   Applying the adaptive inertia-related control strategy and ignoring the
term Td in (6.7.1) gives the adaptive control scheme of Table 6.3.1. However,
if we reexamine the stability analysis given in Section 6.3 for the adaptive
inertia-related controller, we can see that a bounded disturbance term gives
us a different type of stability result for the tracking error. Specifically, with
the addition of the bounded disturbance term in (6.7.1), the derivative of the
Lyapunov function in (6.3.7) becomes

                                                                          (6.7.2)

   From (6.7.2) it is obvious that can no longer be taken to be negative
semidefinite. From our previous experience with Lyapunov stability theory, it
was desired to have be “negative”; therefore, it stands to reason that it
would be advantageous to find the region where is negative in (6.7.2). By
the use of the Rayleigh-Ritz Theorem (see Chapter 1), we can write (6.7.2) as

                                                                          (6.7.3)

  From (6.7.3), a sufficient condition on the negativity of     can be obtained.
That is, will be negative if


                                                                          (6.7.4)


If (6.7.4) is satisfied, is negative and V will decrease. If V decreases, then by
our definition of the Lyapunov function given in (6.3.7), r must eventually
decrease. However, if r decreases such that




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
372                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators


                                                                           (6.7.5)

then may become positive, which means that V will start to increase. If V
starts to increase, we gain insight into the problem by examining two
possibilities. One, the increase in V causes r to increase such that (6.7.4) is
satisfied. This means that V will start to decrease and hence r will eventually
decrease. If r increased and decreased in this fashion continually, then r and
  both remain bounded. The other possibility is that the increase in V causes
  to increase while r stays small enough such that (6.7.5) is satisfied. For
this case, V remains positive; therefore, could continue to increase. If V
continues to increase in this fashion, r is bounded; however, and hence
both become unbounded.
   The argument above reveals that the parameter estimate in the adaptive
inertia-related control law may go unstable in the presence of a bounded
disturbance. That is, the parameter estimate may diverge under the
assumption that the robot model is given by (6.7.1). If the parameter estimate
becomes too large, we can see from Table 6.3.1 that the input torque will
start to grow and possibly saturate the joint motors; therefore, it would be
desirable to modify the adaptive controller to eliminate the possibility of
torque saturation.

EXAMPLE 6.7–1: Effects of Disturbance on Adaptive Control
In this example we simulate the same adaptive controller given in Example
6.3.1 with the same control parameters, initial conditions, and desired
trajectory; however, we have added the disturbance term


                                                                               (1)


to the two-link manipulator dynamics. The tracking error and parameter
estimates are illustrated in Figure 6.7.1. From the figure, note that for the
disturbance given by (1), the parameter estimates do not become unbounded;
however, the tracking error is no longer asymptotically stable.
                                                                           䊏

Torque-Based Disturbance Rejection Method
To reject an additive disturbance term in the robot model, we illustrate
how the parameter estimates remain bounded if the torque control is
modified to be




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.7 Robustness of Adaptive Controllers                                             373




Figure 6.7.1: Simulation of adaptive controller in the pressence of disturbance.




                                                                              (6.7.6)

where ␶d is the torque control given in Table 6.3.1,

                                                                              (6.7.7)

sgn(·) is used to denote the signum function, and kd is a scalar constant that
satisfies

                                                                              (6.7.8)

with Tdi; representing the ith component of the n×1 vector Td [Slotine and Li
1985(c)].
   Applying the disturbance rejection controller given in (6.7.6), the derivative
of the Lyapunov function in (6.3.7) becomes

                                                                              (6.7.9)

By noting that

                                                                            (6.7.10)

(6.7.9) can be written as


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
374                                       Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators



                                                                          (6.7.11)


By utilizing (6.7.8), we can write (6.7.11) as

                                                                          (6.7.12)

The same arguments as in Section 6.6 can be used to show that the position
tracking error is asymptotically stable while the velocity tracking error and
the parameter estimate are bounded.

EXAMPLE 6.7–2: Disturbance Rejection for a Two-Link Robot Arm
In this example we simulate the modified adaptive controller given in (6.7.6)
with the same control parameters, initial conditions, and desired trajectory as
in Example 6.3.1 and also with the disturbance given in Example 6.7.1. The
modified torque controller is given by

                                                                               (1)

and

                                                                               (2)

where ␶a1 , and ␶a2 are the same adaptive torque controllers given in
Example 6.3.1, ␭1, and ␭2 are the same scalar constants defined in Example
6.3.1, and

                                                                               (3)

   Note that kd has been chosen to satisfy the condition given in (6.7.8) and
that the update laws are the same as those given in Example 6.3.1. The
tracking error and parameter estimates are illustrated in Figure 6.7.2. From
the figure we note that the parameter estimates remain bounded; furthermore,
the tracking error is now asymptotically stable even in the presence of a
disturbance. It is important to note that for the theoretical development given
for the torque-based disturbance rejection method above, we only guaranteed
the velocity tracking error to be bounded.
                                                                           䊏




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.7 Robustness of Adaptive Controllers                                            375

Estimator-Based Disturbance Rejection Method
In [Reed and Ioannou 1988] a modified version of the ␴-modification [Ioannou
and Tsakalis 1985] to the adaptive inertia-related control algorithm [Slotine
and Li 1985(a)] was introduced to compensate for unmodeled dynamics and
bounded disturbances in the robot model. In this method the torque control is
the same as that given by Table 6.3.1; however, the adaptive update rule is
modified to be

                                                                              (6.7.13)




Figure 6.7.2: Simulation of adaptive controller with disturbance rejection,


where


                                                                              (6.7.14)


and
                                                                              (6.7.15)
With the update rule (6.7.13), Reed showed that the tracking error could be
confined to a residual set and that all closed-loop signals are bounded.
   As we have shown, a bounded disturbance can cause the parameter estimates
to go unstable. The update rule given by (6.7.13) is intended to remedy this



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
376                                            Adaptive Control of Robotic Manipulators

problem by regulating on-line the size of the parameter estimates. This is
done by the scalar design constant ␸0. That is, by checking the size of the
parameter estimates against ␸ 0, the parameter estimates are forced to remain
bounded by using this new update rule. One can see clearly that if 储 储<␸ 0, the
update rule is the same as that given by Table 6.3.1. In other words, if the
parameter estimates do not get too large, the controller is the same as the
adaptive inertia-related controller. On the other hand, if parameter estimates
get too large, the adaptive update rule is modified to ensure that the parameter
estimates remain bounded. How this σ-modification accomplishes this task is
now discussed.
    To motivate how the update rule given in (6.7.13) was formulated, examine
the case when 储 储>␸ 0. This is the stabilizing part of the update rule. That is,
if the parameter estimates become too large, the update rule switches to

                                                                               (6.7.16)

or in terms of the parameter error,

                                                                               (6.7.17)

   We now reexamine the stability analysis given in Section 6.3 for the adaptive
inertia-related controller with the parameter update rule given by (6.7.16).
Specifically, with the addition of the bounded disturbance term in (6.7.1), the
derivative of the Lyapunov function in (6.3.7) becomes

                                                                               (6.7.18)

or

                                                                               (6.7.19)

where


                                                                               (6.7.20)


   By the use of the Rayleigh-Ritz Theorem (see Chapter 1), we can write
(6.7.19) as

                                                                               (6.7.21)

     From (6.7.21),              will be negative if



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6.8 Summary                                                                   377



                                                                          (6.7.22)

   It is important to note that the right-hand side of (6.7.22) is a constant;
therefore, if (6.7.22) is satisfied, is negative, which causes V to decrease. If
V decreases, then by our definition of the Lyapunov function given in (6.3.7),
x must eventually decrease. However, if x decreases such that


                                                                          (6.7.23)

then may be positive, which means that V will start to increase. The increase
in V causes x to increase such that (6.7.22) is satisfied. This means that V now
starts to decrease again and hence x eventually decreases. This argument
illustrates how x is bounded. If x is bounded, then from (6.7.20), r and are
bounded. Since r is bounded, standard linear control arguments can be used
to show that e and e are bounded.
    One last point is now discussed regarding the region ␸ 0ⱕ储 储ⱕ2␸ 0. for the
adaptive update rule given in (6.7.13). This part of the adaptive update rule
is used to ensure that there is a smooth transition between the adaptive
inertia-related update rule and the stabilizing portion of the update rule
given by (6.7.16). That is, this ensures that we do not obtain any
discontinuities in the parameter estimates, which could cause a large
discontinuity in the input torque. A large discontinuity is undesirable in the
input torque signal since this type of signal could cause the robot manipulator
to jerk violently.


6.8        Summary

In this chapter an account of several of the most recent adaptive control
results for rigid robots has been given. The intent has been to lend some
perspective to the growing list of adaptive control results for robot manipulators.
Some research areas, such as transient behavior, digital implementation, and
robustness to unmodeled dynamics, will no doubt be addressed in the future.
An issue that remains to be investigated is the comparison of the advantages
and disadvantages of the different servo and adaptive laws.
   Some excellent adaptive control work with regard to robot manipulators
by other researchers is outlined in [Ortega and Spong 1988]. Since this is such
a well-studied field and there is limited space available in this chapter, we
apologize to anyone who has been left out.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES

[Anderson 1977] Anderson, B., “Exponential stability of linear equations
   arising in adaptive identification,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, Feb.
   1977, pp. 83–88.g
[Arimoto and Miyazaki 1986] Arimoto, S., and F.Miyazaki, “Stability and
    robustness of PD feedback control with gravity compensation for robot
    manipulators,” Robot. Theory Pract., DSC Vol. 3, pp. 67–72, ASME
    Winter Annual Meeting, Dec. 1986.
[Åström and Wittenmark 1989] K.Åström and B.Wittenmark, Adaptive
    Control. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[Brogliato et al. 1990] Brogliato, B., I.Landau, and R.Lozano-Leal, “Adaptive
    motion control of robot manipulators: a unified approach based on
    passitivity,” Proc. IEEE Am. Controls Conf, pp. 2259–2264, San Diego,
    CA, May 1990.
[Craig 1985] Craig, J., Adaptive Control of Mechanical Manipulators. Reading,
    MA.: Addison Wesley, 1985.
[Ioannou and Tsakalis 1985] Ioannou, P., and K.Tsakalis, “A robust direct
    adaptive controller,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. AC-31, no. 11,
    pp. 1033–1043, 1985.
[Kailath 1980] Kailath, T, Linear Systems. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
    Hall, 1980.
[Landau 1979] Landau, Y., Adaptive Control: The Model Reference Approach.
    New York: Marcel Dekker, 1979.
[Li and Slotine 1987] Li, W., and J.Slotine, “Parameter estimation strategies
     for robotic applications,” ASME Winter Annual Meeting, Boston, 1987.
[Morgan and Narendra 1977] Morgan, A., and K.Narendra, “On the uniform
   asymptotic stability of certain linear nonautonomous differential
   equations,” SIAM J. Control Optim., 1977, p. 15.

                                                                         379
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
380                                                             REFERENCES

[Ortega and Spong 1988] Ortega, R., and M.Spong, “Adaptive motion control
    of rigid robots: a tutorial,” Proc. IEEE Conf Decision Control, Austin,
    TX, 1988.
[Reed and Ioannou 1988] Reed, J., and P.Ioannou, “Instability analysis and
    robust adaptive control of robotic manipulators,” Proc. IEEE Conf
    Decision Control, Austin, TX, 1988.
[Slotine 1988] Slotine, J., (1988), “Putting physics in control: the example of
    robotics,” Control Syst. Mag., Dec. 1988, Vol. 8, pp 12–15.
[Slotine and Li 1985(a)] Slotine, J., and W.Li, “Theoretical issues in adaptive
    control,” 5th Yale Workshop on Applications of Adaptive Systems Theory,
    Yale University, New Haven, CT, 1985(a).
[Slotine and Li 1985(b)] Slotine, J., and W.Li, “Adaptive robot control: a new
    perspective,” Proc. IEEE Conf Decision Control, Los Angeles, 1985(b).
[Slotine and Li 1985(c)] Slotine, J., and W.Li, “Adaptive strategies in
    constrained manipulation,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf Robot. Autom., Raleigh,
    NC, Mar. 1985(c), pp. 595–601.
[Vidyasagar 1978] Vidyasagar, M., Nonlinear Systems Analysis. Englewood
    Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1978.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES                                                                    381


PROBLEMS

Section 6.2
6.2–1        Design and simulate the adaptive computed-torque controller given
             in Table 6.2.1 for the two-link polar robot arm given in Chapter 2.

6.2–2        Find different positive-definite, symmetric matrices, P and Q from
             that given in Example 6.2.2 that satisfy



             where



             Kp, Kv are diagonal positive-definite matrices, and On, In represent
             the n×n zero matrix and n×n identity matrix, respectively.

6.2–3: With the P and Q found in Problem 6.2–3, redo Problem 6.2–1 and
       report the differences in the tracking error performance.

Section 6.3
6.3–1        Design and simulate the adaptive inertia-related controller given in
             Table 6.3.1 for the two-link polar robot arm given in Chapter 2.

6.3–2        For the simulation given in Problem 6.3–1, run several simulations
             with different values of the control parameters (ie., ⌳, Kv, ⌫), and
             report the effects on tracking error performance.

6.3–3        Enumerate the the advantages of the adaptive controller given in
             Table 6.3.1 over the adaptive controller given in Table 6.2.1.

6.3–4        As given in (6.3.8), the filtered tracking error is defined by



             where ⌳ is a positive-definite diagonal matrix. Show that if




Section 6.4
6.4–1        Design and simulate an adaptive controller for the two-link re volute
             arm given in Example 6.3.1 with the PID servo law given in Example
             6.4.3 and the adaptation law given in Example 6.4.1. Report any


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
382                                                                      REFERENCES

             differences from that given in Example 6.3.1.

6.4–2        Redo Problem 6.4–1 with the proportional+integral adaptation law
             given by Equations (6.4.20) and (6.4.21).

Section 6.5
6.5–1        Show analytically that qd=sin t in Example 6.5.2 is not persistently
             exciting.

Section 6.6
6.6–1        Show that



6.6–2        Simulate the composite adaptive controller given in Example 6.6.3
             and report the effects on the tracking error of using different values
             for P(0) and a (i.e., the pole of the filter used for the filtered regression
             matrix).

6.6–3        Show how Barbalat’s lemma given in Chapter 1 can be used in the
             proof of the composite adaptive controller to yield



Section 6.7
6.7–1        Redo Problem 6.3–1 with the additive bounded disturbance




             added to two-link polar robot arm dynamics given in Chapter 2.

6.7–2        Redo Problem 6.3–1 with the additive bounded disturbance given in
             Problem 6.7–1 and with the term



             added to the adaptive controller. Run several simulations with different
             values of kd, and report the effects on tracking error performance.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
