Chapter 2

Introduction to Control
Theory
In this chapter we review various control theory concepts that are used in
the control of robots. We first review the state-space formulation for both
linear and nonlinear systems and present the stability concepts needed in the
sequel. The chapter is intended to introduce modern control concepts, but
even readers with a background in control theory may wish to consult it for
notation and convenience.


2.1 Introduction

The control of robotic manipulators is a mature yet fruitful area for research,
development, and manufacturing. Industrial robots are basically positioning
and handling devices. Therefore, a useful robot is one that is able to control
its movement and the interactive forces and torques between the robot and
its environment. This book is concerned with the control aspect of robotic
manipulators. To control usually requires the availability of a mathematical
model and of some sort of intelligence to act on the model. The mathematical
model of a robot is obtained from the basic physical laws governing its
movement. Intelligence, on the other hand, requires sensory capabilities and
means for acting and reacting to the sensed variables. These actions and
reactions of the robot are the result of controller design.
    In this chapter we review the concepts of control theory that are needed
in this book. All proofs are omitted, but references are made to more
specialized books and papers where proofs are provided. Once a satisfactory

                                                                            21
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
22                                              Introduction to Control Theory

model of the robot dynamics is obtained as described in Chapter 2, the
automatic control concepts presented in the current chapter may be used to
modify the actions and reactions of the robot to different stimuli. Subsequent
chapters will therefore deal with the application of control principles to the
robot equations. The particular controller used will depend on the complexity
of the mathematical model, the application at hand, the available resources,
and a host of other criteria.
   We begin the chapter in section 2.2 with a review of the state-space
description for linear, continuous- and discrete-time systems. A similar review
of nonlinear systems is presented in section 2.3. The Equilibria of nonlinear
systems is reviewed in section 2.4, while concepts of vector spaces is presented
in section 2.5. Stability theory is presented in section 2.6, which constitutes
the bulk of the chapter. In Section 2.7, Lyapunov stability results are presented
while input-output stability concepts are presented in section 2.8. Advanced
stability concepts are compiled to make later developments more concise in
section 2.9. In section 2.10 we review some useful theorems and lemmas. In
section 2.11 we the basic linear controller designs from a state-space point
of view, and the chapter is concluded in Section 2.12.


2.2 Linear State-Variable Systems

Many physical systems such as the robots considered in this book are
described by differential or difference equations. These describing equations,
which are usually obtained from fundamental physical laws, provide the
starting point for the analysis and control of systems. There are, of course,
some systems which are so complicated that describing differential (or
difference) equations are not available. We do not consider those systems in
this book.
   In this section we study the state-space model of physical systems that are
linear. We limit ourselves to systems described by ordinary differential
equations which will lead to a finite-dimensional state space. Partial
differential equations, leading to infinite-dimensional systems, are needed to
study flexible robotic manipulators, but those are not considered in this
textbook. We stress that the material of this chapter is intended as a quick
introduction to these topics and will not be comprehensive. The readers are
referred to [Kailath 1980], [Antsaklis and Michel 1997] for more rigorous
presentations of linear control systems.

Continuous-Time Systems
A continuous-time system is said to be linear if it obeys the principle of
superposition] that is, if the output y1(t) results from the input u1(t) and the
output y2(t) results from the input u2(t), then the output resulting from


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.2 Linear State-Variable Systems                                               23

u(t)=α1u1(t)+α2u2(t) is given by y(t)=α1y1(t)+α2y2(t), where α1 and α2 are scalar
constants. Linear, single-input/single-output (SISO), continuous-time, time-
invariant systems are described by linear, scalar, constant-coefficient ordinary
differential equations such as



                                                                           (2.2.1)



where ai, bi, i=0,…,n are scalar constants, y(t) is a scalar output and u(t) is a
scalar input. Moreover, we are given for some time t0 the initial conditions,




Note that the input u(t) is differentiated at most as many times as the output
y(t). Otherwise, the system is said to be non-dynamic.

State-Space Realization
The state of the system is defined as a sufficient set of variables, which when
specified at time t0 along with the input u(t), t≥t0, is sufficient to completely
determine the behavior of the system for all t≥t0 [Kailath 1980]. The state
vector then contains all necessary variables needed to determine the future
behavior of any signal in the system. By definition, such a state vector x(t) is
not unique, a feature that will be exploited later. In fact, if x is a state vector
then so is any (t)=Tx(t), where T is any n×n invertible matrix. For the
continuous-time system described in (2.2.1), the following choice of a state




                                                                           (2.2.2)

vector is possible:
where           , i=1,2,…, n. The input-output equation then reduces to

                                                                           (2.2.3)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
24                                             Introduction to Control Theory

     A more compact formulation of 2.2.2 and 2.2.3 is given by


                                                                         (2.2.4)


where




                                                                        (2.2.5)

   This particular state-space representation is known as the controllable
canonical form [Kailath 1980], [Antsaklis and Michel 1997]. In general, a
linear, time-invariant, continuous-time system will have more than one input
and one output. In fact, u(t) is an m×1 vector and y(t) is a p×1 vector. The
differential equations relating u(t) to y(t) will not be presented here, but the
state-space representation of the multi-input/multi-output (MIMO) system
becomes


                                                                        (2.2.6)


where A is n×n, B is n×m, C is p×n, and D is p×m. For the specific forms of
A, B, C, and D, the reader is again referred to [Kailath 1980], [Antsaklis and
Michel 1997]. A block diagram of (2.2.6) is shown in Figure 2.2.1a. Note
that the minimal number of states is equal to the required number of initial
conditions in order to find a unique solution to the set of differential
equations.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.2 Linear State-Variable Systems                                               25




Figure 2.2.1: (a) State-space block diagram of (2.2.6); (b) Transfer function block
diagram of (2.2.6)




EXAMPLE 2.2–1: Double Integrator
Consider a SISO system described by

                                          ÿ(t)=u(t)

   This system is known as the double integrator and represents a wide variety
of physical systems described by Newton’s Law. In order to obtain a state-
space description, let




so




                                                                                䊏




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
26                                               Introduction to Control Theory

EXAMPLE 2.2–2: Two-Platform System
Consider the MIMO mechanical system shown in Figure 2.2.2 which represents
a 2 platform system used to isolate experiments from external disturbances.
There are 2 inputs to the system given by u2 which causes the ground to move
and u1 which causes the platform m1 to move. The system also has 2 outputs,
namely the motion y1 of platform m1 and the motion y2 of platform m2. The
experiments will be conducted on top of platform m1 and therefore, one would
like to minimize the size of y1. The differential equations describing this system
are obtained using Newton’s second law:




A state-space formulation of this system can be obtained by choosing




                                                                               䊏




Transfer Functions
Another equivalent representation of linear, time-invariant, continuous-time
systems is given by their transfer function, which relates the input of the
system u(t) to its output y(t) in the Laplace variable s or in the frequency
domain. It is important to note that the transfer function description has no


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.2 Linear State-Variable Systems                                           27




                                    Figure 2.2.2: Two-platform system




information about the initial conditions of the system and, as such, will not
provide a unique output to a particular input unless all initial conditions are
zero [Antsaklis and Michel 1997], [Kailath 1980]. The transfer function
formalism, however, is important in practice, since many engineers are familiar
with frequency-domain specifications. In addition, the identification of many
systems may be effectively performed in the frequency domain [Ljung 1999].
It is therefore imperative that one should be able to move between the state-
space (or modern) description and the transfer function (or classical)
description.
    Let us consider the system described by (2.2.6) and take its Laplace
transform,


                                                                        (2.2.7)



where X(s), U(s), and Y(s) are the Laplace transforms of x(t), u(t), and y(t)
respectively. The initial state vector is x(0). By eliminating X(s) between the
two equations in (2.2.7), we find the following relation:


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
28                                                             Introduction to Control Theory

                               Y(s)=[C(sI-A)-1B+D] U(s)+C(sI-A)-1x(0)                 (2.2.8)


As mentioned previously, the transfer function is obtained as the relationship
between the input U(s) and the output Y(s) when x(0)=0, that is,


                                          Y(s)=[C(sI-A)-1B+D] U(s).                   (2.2.9)


The transfer function of this particular linear, time-invariant system is given
by


                                             P(s)=C(sI-A)-1B+D                       (2.2.10)


such that (see Fig.2.2.1)


                                               Y(s)=P(s)U(s)                         (2.2.11)



EXAMPLE 2.2–3: Transfer Function of Double Integrator
Consider the system of Example 2.2.1. It is easy to see that the transfer
function     is



                                                                                           䊏

Discrete-Time Systems
In the discrete-time case, a difference equation is used to described the system
as follows:


                                                                                     (2.2.12)


where ai, bi, i=0,…,n are scalar constants, y(k) is the output, and u(k) is the
input at time k. Note that the output at time k+n depends on the input at
time k+n but not on later inputs; otherwise, the system would be non-
causal.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.2 Linear State-Variable Systems                                            29

State-Space Representation
In a similar fashion to the continuous-time case, the following state-vector is
defined:




                                                                        (2.2.13)


The input-output equation then reduces to

                               y(k)=b0x1(k)+b1x2(k)+…+ bn-1xn(k)+u(k)   (2.2.14)

A more compact formulation of (2.2.7) and (2.2.8) is given by


                                                                        (2.2.15)


where




                                                                        (2.2.16)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
30                                                        Introduction to Control Theory

The MIMO case is similar to the continuous-time case and is given by


                                                                                (2.2.17)


where A is n×n, B is n×m, C is p×n, and D is p×m.
  In many practical cases, such as in the control of robots, the system is a
continuous-time system, but the controller is implemented using digital
hardware. This will require the designer to translate between continuous-
and discrete-time systems. There are many different approaches to
“discretizing” a continuous-time system, some of which are discussed in
Chapter 3. The interested reader in this very important aspect of the control
problem is referred to [Åström and Wittenmark 1996], [Franklin et al.
1997].


EXAMPLE 2.2–4: Double Integrator in Discrete Time

Recall Example 2.2.1 which presented a model of the double integrator or
Newton’s system. One discrete-time version of the differential equation is
given by the following difference equation




where T is the sampling period in seconds. If we choose x1(k)=y(k) and
x2(k)=x1(k+1), we obtain the state-space description




                                                                                      䊏


Transfer Function Representation
In a similar fashion to the continuous-time case, a linear, time-invariant,
discrete-time system given by (2.2.17) may be described in the Z-transform
domain, from input U(z) to output Y(z) by its transfer function P(z) such
that

                                          Y(z)=P(z)U(z)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.3 Nonlinear State-Variable Systems                                           31

where


                                          P(z)=C(zI-A)-1B+D


Note that the Z transform is used in the discrete-time case versus the Laplace
transform in the continuous-time case.

EXAMPLE 2.2–5: Tranfer Function of Discrete-Tiem Double Integrator
The transfer function of the Example 2.2.4 is given by




                                                                               䊏


2.3 Nonlinear State-Variable Systems

In many cases, the underlying physical behavior may not be described using
linear state-variable equations. This is the case of robotic manipulators where
the interaction between the different links is described by nonlinear differential
equations, as shown in Chapter 3. The state-variable formulation is still
capable of handling these systems, while the transfer function and frequency-
domain methods fail. In this section we deal with the nonlinear variant of
the preceding section and stress the classical approach to nonlinear systems
as studied in [Khalil 2001], [Vidyasagar 1992] and in [Verhulst 1997], [LaSale
and Lefschetz 1961], [Hahn 1967].


Continuous-Time Systems

A nonlinear, scalar, continuous-time, time-invariant system is described by a
nonlinear, scalar, constant-coefficient differential equation such as


                                                                          (2.3.1)


where y(t) is the output and u(t) is the input to the system under consideration.
As with the linear case, we define the state vector x by its components as
follows:


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
32                                                               Introduction to Control Theory




                                                                                        (2.3.2)


The output equation then reduces to:

                                                    y(t)=x1(t)                          (2.3.3)

A more compact formulation of (2.3.2) and (2.3.3) is given by


                                                                                        (2.3.4)


where


                                          U(t)=[u(t) u(1)(t)…u(n-1) (t)]T


and

                                                 c=[1 0 0…0].                           (2.3.5)


EXAMPLE 2.3–1: Nonlinear Systems
We present 2 examples illustrating such concepts:
1. Consider the damped pendulum equation




A state-space description is obtained by choosing x1=y, x2=y, leading to




The time history of y(t) is shown in Figure 2.3.1.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.3 Nonlinear State-Variable Systems                                          33




                              Figure 2.3.1: Damped pendulum trajectory.



2. A classical nonlinear system is the Van der Pol oscillator which is described
   by




or in state-space with




   The time history of y(t) and the phase-plane plot (i.e. x2 versus x1) is shown
in Figure 2.3.2.
                                                                              䊏


EXAMPLE 2.3–2: Rigid Robot Dynamics

A rigid robot is described by the following equations




where M(q) is an n×n Inertia matrix, q and its derivatives are n×1 vectors of
generalized coordinates, V(q, q), G(q) and τ are n×1 vectors containing
velocity-dependent torques, gravity torques, and input torques respectively.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
34                                               Introduction to Control Theory




Figure 2.3.2: Van der Pol Oscillator Time Trajectories: (a) Time history, (b) phase
plane.



In this example, we will concentrate on writing the n coupled differential
equations into a state-space form. In fact, let a state vector x be




and the input vector be u=τ and suppose the output vector is y= q. Due to
some special properties of rigid robots (see Chapter 2), the matrix M(q) is


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.3 Nonlinear State-Variable Systems                                        35

known to be invertible so that




or


                                                                            (1)


where




                                                                            䊏

Discrete-Time Systems
A nonlinear, scalar, discrete-time, time-invariant system is described by a
nonlinear, scalar, constant-coefficient difference equation such as,



                                                                       (2.3.6)

where y(.) and u are as defined before. A simple choice of state variables will
lead to




                                                                       (2.3.7)

or, more compactly, as


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
36                                              Introduction to Control Theory




                                                                       (2.3.8)

where U(k) and c are defined similarly to those given in equation (2.3.4).

EXAMPLE 2.3–3: Logistics Equation
Consider the scalar system




which leads to the state-space representation




                                                                             䊏

We will not emphasize the study of discrete nonlinear systems since robots
are described by differential equations. However, as discussed in Chapter 4,
robot controllers are usually implemented using digital controllers. It will
therefore be advantageous to be able to translate between continuous-and
discrete-time description of nonlinear dynamical systems as discussed in
[åAström and Wittenmark 1995], [Franklin et al. 1997].


2.4 Nonlinear Systems and Equilibrium Points

In this section, we concentrate on systems described by (2.2.15) with the
additional requirement that u(t) is specified as a function of the state x(t),
i.e.


                                                                       (2.4.1)


   This will allow us to concentrate on the Analysis problem. We require a
few definitions which we shall now introduce.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.4 Nonlinear Systems and Equilibrium Points                                 37

   DEFINITION 2.4–1 The system (2.4.1) is said to be autonomous if f[t, x(t)]
is not explicitly dependent on time, i.e.


                                                                             (1)

                                                                             䊏


EXAMPLE 2.4–1: Nonautonomous System
Both systems introduced in Example 2.3.1 are autonomous while the system
described by



is not.

                                                                             䊏

DEFINITION 2.4–2 A vector xe∈ is a fixed or equilibrium point of (2.4.1)
                                          n

at time t0 if


                                                                             (1)

                                                                             䊏
EXAMPLE 2.4–2: Equilibrium Point of Autonomous System
The system described by




is autonomous and it has an equilibrium point at the origin of n.

                                                                             䊏
Note that:

•     If a system is autonomous, then an equilibrium point at time t0 is also an
      equilibrium point at all other times.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
38                                                        Introduction to Control Theory

•     If xe is an equilibrium point at time t0 of the non-autonomous system
      (2.4.1), then xe is an equilibrium point of (2.4.1) for all t1≥t0.


EXAMPLE 2.4–3: Equilibrium Point of Nonautonomous System

Consider the system




which is non-autonomous. It has NO EQUILIBRIUM POINTS. Although it
might seem that it has 2 equilibrium points xe1=-1 and xe2=1 at time t0=1.
However, these are not equilibrium points for times since at times t≥1 the
conditions of equilibrium does not hold.
                                                                                      䊏


Some books also used the terms stationary or singular points to denote
equilibrium points.

EXAMPLE 2.4–4: Damped Pendulum
Recall the pendulum in Example 2.3.1 and let us try to find its equilibrium
points. Note first that the system is autonomous so that we do not need to
specify the particular time t0 and then note that the pendulum is at equilibrium
if both


                                          x2=0 and sin(x1)=0


Therefore the equilibrium points are at




  It is obvious that the pendulum is at equilibrium when it is hanging straight
up or straight down with zero velocity.
                                                                                      䊏

DEFINITION 2.4–3 An equilibrium point xe at t0 of (2.4.1) is said to be
isolated if there is a neighborhood N of xe which contains no other equilibrium
points besides xe.                                                            䊏


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.5 Vector Spaces, Norms, and Inner Products                              39

EXAMPLE 2.4–5: Equilibrium Points of Pendulum
The equilibrium points of the pendulum are isolated. On the other hand, a
system described by =0 has for equilibrium points any point in R and
therefore, none of its equilibrium points is isolated.
                                                                          䊏


2.5 Vector Spaces, Norms, and Inner Products

In this section, we will discuss some properties of nonlinear differential
equations and their solutions. We will need many concepts such as vector
spaces and norms which we will introduce briefly. The reader is referred to
[Boyd and Barratt], [Desoer and Vidyasagar 1975], [Khalil 2001] for proofs
and details.

Linear Vector Spaces
In most of our applications, we need to deal with (linear) real and complex
vector spaces which are defined subsequently.

DEFINITION 2.5–1 A real linear vector space (resp. complex linear vector
space is a set V, equipped with 2 binary operations: the addition (+) and the
scalar multiplication (.) such that




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
40                                             Introduction to Control Theory

8. For each x∈V, we have 1.x=x where 1 is the unity in  (resp. in         ).

                                                                                䊏


EXAMPLE 2.5–1: Vector Spaces
The following are linear vector spaces with the associated scalar fields: 
with , and n with .

                                                                                䊏

DEFINITION 2.5–2 A subset M of a vector space V is a subspace if it is a
linear vector space in its own right. One necessary condition for M to be a
subspace is that it contains the zero vector.                             䊏
   We can equip a vector space with many functions. One of which is the
inner product which takes two vectors in V to a scalar either in  or in the
other one is the norm of a vector which takes a vector in V to a positive
value in . The following section discusses the norms of vectors which is
then followed by a section on inner products.


Norms of Signals and Systems
A norm is a generalization of the ideas of distance and length. As stability
theory is usually concerned with the size of some vectors and matrices, we
give here a brief description of some norms that will be used in this book. We
will consider first the norms of vectors defined on a vector space X with the
associated scalar field of real numbers  then introduce the matrix induced
norms, the function norms and finally the system-induced norms or operator
gains.


Vector Norms

We start our discussion of norms by reviewing the most familiar normed
spaces, that is the spaces of vectors with constant entries. In the following,
||a|| denotes the absolute value of a for a real a or the magnitude of a if a is
complex.

DEFINITION 2.5–3 A norm ||·|| of a vector x is a real-valued function defined
on the vector space X such that

1. ||x||>0 for all x∈X, with ||x||=0 if and only if x=0.

2. ||αx||=|α|||x|| for all x∈X and any scalar α.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.5 Vector Spaces, Norms, and Inner Products                                 41

3. ||x+y||≤||x||+|y|| for all x,y ∈X,

                                                                             䊏


EXAMPLE 2.5–2: Vector Norms (1)
The following are common norms in X=n where n is the set of n×1 vectors
with real components.

1. 1-norm:
2. 2-norm:                                also known as the Euclidean norm
3. p-norm:
4. 8-norm:

                                                                             䊏


EXAMPLE 2.5–3: Vector Norms (2)
Consider the vector




Then, ||x||1=5, ||x||2=2 and ||x||∞=2.
                                                                             䊏

                                                                n
We now present an important property of norms of vectors  in which will
be useful in the sequel.

LEMMA 2.5–1: Let ||x||a and ||x||b be any two norms of a vector x∈. Then
there exists finite positive constants k1 and k2 such that




                                                                             䊏

  The two norms in the lemma are said to be equivalent and this particular
property will hold for any two norms on .



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
42                                                              Introduction to Control Theory

EXAMPLE 2.5–4: Equivalent Vector Norms
1. It can be shown that for




2. Consider again the vector of Example 2.5.3. Then we can check that




                                                                                            䊏


Matrix Norms
In systems applications, a particular vector x may be operated on by a matrix
A to obtain another vector y=Ax. In order to relate the sizes of x and Ax we
define the induced matrix norm as follows.

DEFINITION 2.5–4 Let ||x|| be a given norm of x∈. Then each m×n matrix
A, has an induced norm defined by




                                                                       䊏
where sup stands for the supremum.
  It is always imperative to check that the proposed norms verify the
conditions of Definition 2.5.3. The newly defined matrix norm may also be
shown to satisfy

                                          ||AB||i ≤ ||A||i ||B||i

for all n×m matrices A and all m×p matrices B.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.5 Vector Spaces, Norms, and Inner Products                                 43

EXAMPLE 2.5–5: Induced Matrix Norms
Consider the ∞ induced matrix norm, the 1 induced matrix norm and the 2
induced matrix norm,




where ␭max is the maximum eigenvalue. As an illustration, consider the matrix




Then, ||A||i1=max(4, 4, 5)=5, ||A||i2=4.4576, and ||A||i∞= max(4, 7, 2)=7.
                                                                             䊏
Function Norms

Next, we review the norms of time-dependent functions and vectors of
functions. These constitute an important class of signals which will be
encountered in controlling robots.

DEFINITION 2.5–5 Let f(.): [0, ∞)→R be a uniformly continuous function.
A function f is uniformly continuous if for any ⑀>0, there is a ␦(⑀) such that




Then, f is said to belong to Lp if for p∈[1, ∞),




f is said to belong to L∞ if it is bounded i.e. if
where sup f(t) denotes the supremum of f9t) i.e. the smallest number that is


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
44                                                            Introduction to Control Theory


larger than or equal to the maximum value of f(t). L1 denotes the set of signals
with finite absolute area, while L2 denotes the set of signals with finite total
energy.                                                                       䊏
   The following definition of the norms of vector functions is not unique. A
discussion of these norms is found in [Boyd and Barratt].

DEFINITION 2.5–6 Let         denote the set of n×1 vectors of functions fi,
each of which belonging to Lp. The norm of         is




for p⑀ [1, ∞) and


                                                                                          䊏

   Some common norms of scalar signals u(t) that are persistent (i.e. limt→ ∞
u(t)≠0) are the following:

1.                                           which is valid for signals with
   finite steady-state power.
2. ||u||∞=supt≥0 |u(t) which is valid for bounded signals but is dependent on
   outliers.
3.                                                  which measures the steady-state average
      resource consumption.

For vector signals, we obtain:

1.

2.

3.

Note that

  On the other hand, if signals do not persist, we may find their L2 or L1
norms as follows:

1.                                        which measures the total resource consumption


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.5 Vector Spaces, Norms, and Inner Products                                   45


2.                                                           which measures the

      total energy.


EXAMPLE 2.5–6: Function Norms

1. The function f(t)=e-t belongs to L1. In fact, ||e -t|| 1=1. The function
             belongs to L2. The sinusoid f(t)=2sint belongs to L∞ since its
      magnitude is bounded by 2 and ||2sint||∞= 2.
2. Suppose the vector function x(t) has continuous and real-valued
   components, i.e.




where [a, b] is a closed-interval on the real line R. We denote the set of such
functions x by n [a, b]. Then, let us define the real-valued function




where ||x(t)|| is any previously defined norm of x(t) for a fixed t. It can be
verified that ||x(.)|| is a norm on the set n [a, b] and may be used to compare
the size of such functions [Desoer and Vidyasagar 1975]. In fact, it is very
important to distinguish between ||x(t)|| and ||x(.)||. The first is the norm of a
fixed vector for a particular time t while the second is the norm of a time-
dependent vector. It is this second norm (which was introduced in definition
2.5.6) that we shall use when studying the stability of systems.

3. The vector f(t)=[e-t-e-t-(1+t)-2]T is a member of       . On the other hand,
   f(t)=[e-t-e-t-(1+t)-1]T is a member of  and   .
                                                                               䊏
In some cases, we would like to deal with signals that are bounded for finite
times but may become unbounded as time goes to infinity. This leads us to
define the extended Lp spaces. Thus consider the function


                                                                          (2.5.1)


then, the extended Lp space is defined by


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
46                                                       Introduction to Control Theory




where T<∞. We also define the norm on Lpe as




Similar definitions are available for and the interested reader is referred to
[Boyd and Barratt], [Desoer and Vidyasagar 1975].

EXAMPLE 2.5–7: Extended Lp Spaces
The function f(t)=t belongs to Lpe for any p∈[1, ∞] but not to Lp.
                                                                                     䊏
System Norms
We would like next to study the effect of a multi-input-multi-output (MIMO)
system on a multidimensional signal. In other words, what happens to a
time-varying vector u(t) as it passes through a MIMO system H? Let H be a
system with m inputs and l outputs, so that its output to the input u(t) is
given by

                                          y(t)=(Hu)(t)

We say that H is Lp stable if Hu belongs to   whenever u belongs to                and
there exists finite constants ␥>0 and b such that




If p=∞, the system is said to be bounded-input-bounded-output (BIBO) stable.

DEFINITION 2.5–7 The Lp gain of the system H is denoted by ␥p(H) and is
the smallest ␥ such that a finite b exists to verify the equation.


                                                                                     䊏
    Therefore, the gain ␥p characterizes the amplification of the input signal as
it passes through the system. The following lemma characterizes the gains of
linear systems and may be found in [Boyd and Barratt].

LEMMA 2.5–2: Given the linear system H such that an input u(t) results in
an output                                   and suppose H is BIBO
stable, then


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.5 Vector Spaces, Norms, and Inner Products                             47

1.
2.
3.
                                                                          䊏
EXAMPLE 2.5–8: System Norms
1. Consider the system




so that the impulse response is


                                                                         (1)


Note that H(s) is BIBO stable. Then




2. Consider the system




where kv and kp are positive constants. The system is therefore BIBO stable.
Then




where e=2.7183 is the base of natural logarithms.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
48                                              Introduction to Control Theory

                                                                             䊏

     This concludes our brief review of norms as they will be used in this book.

Inner Products
An inner product is an operation between two vectors of a vector space which
will allow us to define geometric concepts such as orthogonality and Fourier
series, etc. The following defines an inner product.

DEFINITION 2.5–8 An inner product defined over a vector space V is a
function <.,.> defined from V to F where F is either  or such that ᭙x, y,
z, ∈V

      1. <x, y>=<y, x>* where the <.,.>* denotes the complex conjugate.
      2. <x, y+z>=<x, y>+<x, z>
      3.                                   ,
      4. <x, x>≥0 where the 0 occurs only for x=0V

                                                                              䊏


EXAMPLE 2.5–9: Inner Products

The usual dot product in n is an inner product.
                                                                              䊏

We can define a norm for any inner product by


                                                                         (2.5.2)


Therefore a norm is a more general concept: A vector space may have a norm
associated with it but not an inner product. The reverse however is not true.
Now, with the norm defined from the inner product, a complete vector space
in this norm (i.e. one in which every Cauchy sequence converges) is known as
a Hilbert Space

Matrix Properties

Some matrix properties play an important role in the study of the stability of
dynamical systems. The properties needed in this book are collected in this
section. We will assume that the readers are familiar with elementary


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.5 Vector Spaces, Norms, and Inner Products                                   49

DEFINITION 2.5–9 All matrices in this definition are square and real.

•     Positive Definite: A real n×n matrix A is positive definite if xT Ax>0 for
      all       , x≠0.
•     Positive Semidefinite: A real n×n matrix A is positive semidefinite if xT
      Ax≥0 for all        .
•     Negative Definite: A real n×n matrix A is negative definite if xT Ax<0 for
      all      , x≠0.
•     Negative Semidefinite: A real n×n matrix A is negative semidefinite if xT
      Ax≤0 for all       .
•     Indefinite: A is indefinite if xT Ax>0 for some           and xT Ax<0 for
      other        .
                                                                               䊏
Note that




where As is the symmetric part of A. Therefore, the test for the definiteness
of a matrix may be done by considering only the symmetric part of A.

THEOREM 2.5–1: Let A=[aij] be a symmetric n×n real matrix. As a result,
all eigenvalues of A are real. We then have the following

•     Positive Definite: A real n×n matrix A is positive definite if all its
      eigenvalues are positive.
•     Positive semidefinite: A real n×n matrix A is positive definite if all its
      eigenvalues are nonnegative.
•     Negative Definite: A real n×n matrix A is negative definite if all its
      eigenvalues are negative.
•     Negative Semidefinite: A real n×n matrix A is negative semidefinite if all
      its eigenvalues are non-positive.
•     Indefinite: A real n×n matrix A is indefinite if some of its eigenvalues are
      positive and some are negative.

                                                                               䊏




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
50                                                Introduction to Control Theory

THEOREM 2.5–2: Rayleigh-Ritz Let A be a real, symmetric n×n positive-
definite matrix. Let ␭min be the minimum eigenvalue and ␭max be the maximum
eigenvalue of A. Then, for any         ,




                                                                                 䊏

THEOREM 2.5–3: Gerschgorin Let A=[aij] be a symmetric n×n real matrix.
Suppose that




If all the diagonal elements are positive, i.e. aii>0, then the matrix A is positive
definite.
                                                                                  䊏

EXAMPLE 2.5–10: Positive Definite Matrics
Consider the matrix


                                                                                (1)


Its symmetric part is given by


                                                                                (2)


This matrix is positive-definite since its eigenvalues are both positive (1.8377,
8.1623). Of course, Gershgorin’s theorem could have been used since the
diagonal elements of As are all positive and




On the other hand, consider a vector x=[x1 x2]T and its 2-norm, then




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.6 Stability Theory                                                           51




as a result of Rayleigh-Ritz theorem.
                                                                               䊏


2.6 Stability Theory

The first stability concept we study, concerns the behavior of free systems, or
equivalently, that of forced systems with a given input. In other words, we
study the stability of an equilibrium point with respect to changes in the
initial conditions of the system. Before doing so however, we review some
basic definitions. These definitions will be stated in terms of continuous,
nonlinear systems with the understanding that discrete, nonlinear systems
admit similar results and linear systems are but a special case of nonlinear
systems.
   Let xe be an equilibrium (or fixed) state of the free continuous-time, possibly
time-varying nonlinear system

                                                                          (2.6.1)

i.e. f(xe, t)=0, where x, f are n×1 vectors.
    We will first review the stability of an equilibrium point xe with the
understanding that the stability of the state x(t) can always be obtained with
a translation of variables as discussed later. The stability definitions we use
can be found in [Khalil 2001], [Vidyasagar 1992].



DEFINITION 2.6–1 In all parts of this definition xe is an equilibrium point
at time t0, and ||.|| denote any function norm previously defined.

      1. Stability: xe is stable in the sense of Lyapunov (SL) at t0, if starting
         close enough to xe at t0, the state will always stay close to xe at later
         times. More precisely, xe is SL at t0, if for any given >0, there exists
         a positive (, t0) such that if




      then




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
52                                                      Introduction to Control Theory




Figure 2.6.1: (a) Stability of xe at t0; (b) Instability of xe at t0.




             xe is stable in the sense of Lyapunov if it is stable for any given t0.
             See Figure 2.6.1a.
      2. Instability: xe is unstable in the sense of Lyapunov (UL), if no matter
         how close to xe the state starts, it will not be confined to the vicinity
         of xe at some later time. In other words, xe is unstable if it is not
         stable at t0. See Figure 2.6.1b for an illustration.
      3. Convergence: xe is convergent (C) at t0, if states starting close to xe
         will eventually converge to xe. In other words, xe is convergent at t0
         if for any positive there exists a positive 1(t0) and a positive T(1, x0,
         t0) such that if




             then




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.6 Stability Theory                                                             53

             xe is convergent, if it is convergent for any t0. See Figure 2.6.2 for
             illustration.




                                   Figure 2.6.2: Convergence of xe at t0



      4. Asymptotic Stability: xe is asymptotically stable (AS) at t0 if states
         starting sufficiently close to xe will stay close and will eventually
         converge to it. More precisely, xe is AS at t0 if it is both convergent
         and stable at t0. xe is AS if it is AS for any t0. An illustration of an AS
         equilibrium point is shown in Figure 2.6.3.




                             Figure 2.6.3: Asymptotic stability of xe at t0



      5. Global Asymptotic Stability: xe is globally asymptotically stable
         (GAS) at t0 if any initial state will stay close to xe and will eventually
         converge to it. In other words, xe is GAS if it is stable at t0, and if
         every x(t) converges to xe as time goes to infinity. xe is GAS if it is


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
54                                                         Introduction to Control Theory

             GAS for any t0 and the system is said to be GAS in this case, since it
             can only have one equilibrium point xe. See Figure 2.6.4.
                                                                                䊏


EXAMPLE 2.6–1: Stability of Various Systems
      1. Consider the scalar time-varying system given by




             the solution of this equation for all tt0 is




             The equilibrium point is located at xe=ye=0. Let us use the 1-norm
             given by |y| and suppose that our aim is to keep |y(t)|< for all tt0.
             It can be seen that our objective is achieved if




             The origin is therefore a stable equilibrium point of this system.
             This is further illustrated in Figure 2.6.5
      2. The damped pendulum system has many equilibrium points as
         described in Example 2.3.1. It can be shown that the equilibrium
         point located at the origin of the state-space is unstable. This is
         illustrated in Figure 2.6.6 where it is seen that no matter how close
         to the origin the initial state is, the norm of x(t) can not be pre-
         specified. On the other hand, note that the two equilibrium points
         at [, 0] are stable.




                        Figure 2.6.4: Global asymptotic stability of xe at t0


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.6 Stability Theory                                                            55




                                 Figure 2.6.5: Time history for


      3. The origin is an equilibrium point of the Van der Pol oscillator.
          However, and as shown in Figure 2.6.7, it is an unstable equilibrium
          point. In fact, suppose the following norm is used per definition
          2.5.6, and let ≠1.Therefore, we would like




             for all t>t0. As can be seen from Figure 2.6.7, no matter how close to
             the origin x0 is, i.e. no matter how small  is, the trajectory will
             eventually leave the ball of radius =1.
      4. The origin is a stable equilibrium point of the robot described in
         Example 2.3.1 whenever the following choices are made

                                          Kv=diag(kvi); Kp=diag(kpi)

             where kvi>0 and kpi>0 for all i=1,…n.
                                                                                䊏


EXAMPLE 2.6–2: Stability versus Convergence
Consider the following system




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
56                                                  Introduction to Control Theory




             Figure 2.6.6: Damped pendulum: (a)time history; (b) phase plane




   There are 2 equilibrium points located at (0, 0) and (1, 0), both of which
are unstable (check!). On the other hand, (1, 0) is convergent since all
trajectories will eventually converge to it after some time T. Before T however,
there is no guarantee that a trajectory will stay within some  of (1, 0) no
matter how close the initial state is to (1, 0). In fact, suppose the system
starts at x(0), then the state-vector is given at any t0 by




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.6 Stability Theory                                                                 57




           Figure 2.6.7: Van der Pol oscillator: (a) time history; (b) phase plane




      See Figure 2.6.8 for illustration of the behavior of the state vector.
                                                                                     䊏
   Note that stability and asymptotic stability are local concepts in the
sense that, if the initial perturbation  is too large, the subsequent states
x(t) may stray arbitrarily far from xe. There exists, therefore, a region


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
58                                                     Introduction to Control Theory




                 Figure 2.6.8: Example 2.6.2 (a)time history; (b) phase plane




centered at xe and given by                                           such that
both stability and asymptotic stability will result for any state starting in
            but not for states starting outside of it. This region is called the
domain of attraction of xe. The equilibrium state xe is GAS if                  .
   Note also that all previous stability definitions depended on the initial
time t0, so that the region of attraction may vary with varying initial times. If
the system (2.6.1) were independent of time (or autonomous), then the
stability concepts in definition 2.6.1 are indeed independent of t0 and they



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.6 Stability Theory                                                      59

will be equivalent to the stability concepts defined next. On the other hand,
and even though the system (2.6.1) is time-dependent, we would like to have
its stability properties not depend on t0 since that would later provide us
with a desired degree of robustness. This leads us to define the uniform
stability concepts [Khalil 2001].

DEFINITION 2.6–2 In all parts of this definition, xe is an equilibrium point
at time t0.

1. Uniform Stability: xe is uniformly stable (US) over [t0, ∞) if δ(, t0)in
   definition 2.6.1 is independent of t0.
2. Uniform Convergence: xe is uniformly convergent (UC) over [t0, ∞) if
   δ1(t 0) and T(1,x0, t0) of definition 2.6.1 can be chosen independent of
   t 0.
3. Uniform Asymptotic Stability: xe is uniformly, asymptotically stable (UAS)
   over [t0, ∞), if it is both US and UC.
4. Global Uniform Asymptotic Stability: x e is globally, uniformly,
   asymptotically stable (GUAS) if it is US, and UC.
5. Global Exponential Stability: xe is globally exponentially stable (GES) if
   there exists α>0, and ß 0 such that for all x0∈ℜn,




                                                                           䊏
Note that GES implies GUAS, and see Figure 2.6.9 for an illustration of
uniform stability concepts.

EXAMPLE 2.6–3: Uniform stability
1. Consider the damped Mathieu equation,




    The origin is a US equilibrium point as shown in Figure 2.6.10
2. The scalar system




    has an equilibrium point at the origin which is UC.



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
60                                                Introduction to Control Theory




Figure 2.6.9: (a) Uniform Stability of xe; (b) uniform convergence of xe; (c) uniform
asymptotic stability of xe; (d) global uniform asymptotic stability of xe

3. The origin is a UAS equilibrium point for



4. The system



     has an equilibrium point xe=0 which is GUAS.

5. Consider the system



     the origin is then a GES equilibrium point since the solution is given by




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.6 Stability Theory                                                       61




    so that

                                          |x(t)|≤|x0|e-t

    See Figure 2.6.11, for an illustration of the time history of x(t).
                                                                       䊏




Figure 2.6.10: Damped Mathieu equation: (a)time history; (b) phase plane




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
62                                                      Introduction to Control Theory




               Figure 2.6.11: Example 2.6.3e: (a)time history; (b) phase plane


In many cases, a bound on the size of the state is all that is required in terms
of stability. This is a less stringent requirement than Lyapunov stability. It is
instructive to study the subtle difference between the definition of
Boundedness below and that of Lyapunov stability in Definition 2.6.1.

DEFINITION 2.6–3

1. Boundedness: xe is bounded (B) at t0 if states starting close to xe will
   never get too far. In other words, xe is bounded at t0 if for each δ>0 such
   that

                                          ||x0-xe||<δ

there exists a positive (r, t0)<∞ such that for all tt0




xe is bounded if it is bounded for any t0.

2. Uniform Boundedness: xe is uniformly bounded (UB) over [t0, ∞) if
   (r, t0) can be made independent of t0.
3. Uniform Ultimate Boundedness: xe is said to be uniformly, ultimately
   bounded (UUB), if states starting close to xe will eventually become




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.6 Stability Theory                                                      63

      bounded. More precisely, xe is UUB if for any δ>0, >0, there exists a
      finite time T( , δ ) such that whenever ||x0-xe||< δ, the following is
      satisfied




for all tT(,δ).

4. Global Uniform Ultimate Boundedness: xe is said to be globally, uniformly,
   ultimately bounded (GUUB) if for >0, there exists a finite time T()
   such that




      for all tT() See Figure 2.6.12 for an illustration of the boundedness
      stability concepts.

                                                                           䊏
EXAMPLE 2.6–4: Boundedness
1. The second-order system given by




      has a uniformly bounded equilibrium point at the origin as shown in
      Figure 2.6.13.

2. The second-order system given by




      has an UUB equilibrium point at xe=0, as shown in Figure 2.6.14.
                                                                           䊏
Note that in general, we are interested in the stability of the motion x(t)
when the system is perturbed from its trajectory. In other words, how far
does x(t) get from its nominal trajectory if the initial state is perturbed?
This problem can always be reduced to the stability of the origin of a non-

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
64                                                    Introduction to Control Theory




Figure 2.6.12: (a) Boundedness of xe at t0; (b) uniform boundedness of xe; (c) uniform
ultimate boundedness of xe; (d) global uniform boundedness of xe.


autonomous system by letting

                                          z=xe-x(t)

and




and studying the stability of the equilibrium point ze=0.



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.6 Stability Theory                                                   65




Figure 2.6.13: Example 2.6.4-a: (a)x1(0)=x2(0)=1 (b) x1(0)=x2(0)=0.1


EXAMPLE 2.6–5: Stability of the Origin
1. Consider the damped pendulum of Example 2.3.1a. Its equilibrium points
   are at [nπ 0]T, n=0, ±1,…. The stability of these points can be studied
   from the stability of the origin of the system




2. Consider the rigid robot equations of Example 2.3.2, and assume



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
66                                               Introduction to Control Theory




Figure 2.6.14: Example 2.6.4-b: (a)x1(0)=x2(0)=1 (b) x1(0)=x2(0)=1


that a desired trajectory is specified by




Therefore, we can define the new system by choosing z=xd-x so that




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.7 Lyapunov Stability Theorems                                              67

and verify that ze=0 is the desired equilibrium point of the modified system if
xe=xd is the desired equilibrium trajectory of the robot.

                                                                             䊏


2.7 Lyapunov Stability Theorems
Lyapunov stability theory deals with the behavior of unforced nonlinear
systems described by the differential equations

                                                                        (2.7.1)

where without loss of generality, the origin is an equilibrium point of (2.7.1).
It may seem to the reader that such a theory is not needed since all we had
to do in the examples of the previous section is to solve the differential
equations, and study the time evolution of a norm of the state vector. There
are at least two reasons why Lyapunov theory is needed. The first is that
Lyapunov theory will allow us to determine the stability of a particular
equilibrium point without actually solving the differential equations. This,
as is well known to any student of nonlinear differential equations, is a
large saving. The second and related reason for using Lyapunov theory is
that it provides us with qualitative results to the stability questions, which
may be used in designing stabilizing controllers of nonlinear dynamical
systems.
   We shall first assume that any necessary conditions for (2.7.1) to have a
unique solution are satisfied [Khalil 2001], [Vidyasagar 1992]. The unique
solution corresponding to x(t0)=x0 is x(t, t0, x0) and will be denoted simply as
x(t). Before we actually introduce Lyapunov’s theorems, we review certain
classes of functions which will simplify the statement of Lyapunov theorems.

Functions of Class K
Consider a continuous function α:ℜ→ℜ

DEFINITION 2.7–1 We say that a belongs to class K, if

1. α(0)=0
2. α(x)>0, for all x>0
3. α is nondecreasing, i.e. α(x1)α(x2) for all x1>x2.

                                                                             䊏




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
68                                                       Introduction to Control Theory

EXAMPLE 2.7–1: Class K Functions
The function α(x)=x2 is a class K function. The function α(x)=x2+1 is not a
class K function because (1) fails. On the other hand, α(x)=-x2 is not a class
K function because (2) and (3) fail.

                                                                                     䊏


DEFINITION 2.7–2 In the following, ℜ+=[0,∞).

1. Locally Positive Definite: A continuous function V:ℜ+×ℜn→R is locally
   positive definite (l.p.d) if there exists a class K function a(.) and a
   neighborhood N of the origin of ℜn such that

                                          V(t, x)α(||x||)

for all t0, and all x∈N.

2. Positive Definite: The function V is said to be positive definite (p.d) if
   N=ℜn.
3. Negative and Local Negative Definite: We say that V is (locally) negative
   definite (n.d) if -V is (locally) positive definite.
                                                                          䊏


EXAMPLE 2.7–2: Locally Positive Definite Functions
[Vidyasagar 1992] The function                         is l.p.d but not
p.d, since V(t, x)=0 at x=(0, π/2). On the other hand,
is not even l.p.d because V(t, x)→0 as t→∞ for any x. The function
                            is p.d.
                                                                     䊏


DEFINITION 2.7–3

In the following,

1. Locally Decrescent: A continuous function                       is locally
   decrescent if There exists a class K function ß(.) and a neighborhood N
   of the origin of    such that

                                          V(t, x)ß(||x||)

for all t0 and all x∈Ν.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.7 Lyapunov Stability Theorems                                              69

2. Decrescent: We say that V is decrescent if N=ℜn.
                                                                             䊏


EXAMPLE 2.7–3: Decrescent Functions
[Vidyasagar 1992] The function                                   is locally but
not globally decrescent. On the other hand,                          is globally
decrescent.

                                                                             䊏


DEFINITION 2.7–4 Given a continuously differentiate function V: ℜ+×ℜn→
R together with a system of differential equations (2.7.1), the derivative of V
along (2.7.1) is defined as a function V: ℜ+×ℜn→R given by




                                                                             䊏

EXAMPLE 2.7–4: Lyapunov Functions
Consider the function                          of Example 2.7.3 and assume
given a system




Then, the derivative of V(t, x) along this system is



                                                                             䊏

Lyapunov Theorems
We are now ready to state Lyapunov Theorems, which we group in Theorem
2.7.1. For the proof, see [Khalil 2001], [Vidyasagar 1992].

THEOREM 2.7–1: Lyapunov

Given the nonlinear system




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
70                                               Introduction to Control Theory

with an equilibrium point at the origin, i.e. f(t, 0)=0, and let N be a
neighborhood of the origin of size  i. e.




Then

1. Stability: The origin is stable in the sense of Lyapunov, if for x∈Ν, there
   exists a scalar function V(t, x) with continuous partial derivative such
   that

      (a) V(t, x) is positive definite
      (b) V is negative semi-definite

2. Uniform Stability: The origin is uniformly stable if in addition to (a) and
   (b) V(t, x) is decrescent for x∈Ν.
3. Asymptotic Stability: The origin is asymptotically stable if V(t, x) satisfies
   (a) and is negative definite for x∈Ν.
4. Global Asymptotic Stability: The origin is globally, asymptotically stable
   if V(t, x) verifies (a), and V(t, x) is negative definite for all x∈ℜn i.e. if
   N=ℜn.
5. Uniform Asymptotic Stability: The origin is UAS if V(t, x) satisfies (a),
   V(t, x) is decrescent, and V(t,x) is negative definite for x∈Ν.
6. Global Uniform Asymptotic Stability: The origin is GUAS if N=ℜn, and
   if V(t, x) satisfies (a), V(t,x) is decrescent, V(t,x) is negative definite and
   V(t, x) is radially unbounded, i.e. if it goes to infinity uniformly in time
   as ||x||→∞.
7. Exponential Stability: The origin is exponentially stable if there exists
   positive constants α, ß, γ such that




8. Global Exponential Stability: The origin is globally exponential stable if
   it is exponentially stable for all x∈ℜn.
                                                                          䊏


The function V(t, x) in the theorem is called a Lyapunov function. Note that
the theorem provides sufficient conditions for the stability of the origin and
that the inability to provide a Lyapunov function candidate has no indication
on the stability of the origin for a particular system.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.7 Lyapunov Stability Theorems                                    71

EXAMPLE 2.7–5: Stability via Lyapunov Functions
1. Consider the system described by




and choose a Lyapunov function candidate




Then the origin may be shown to be a stable equilibrium point.

2. Consider the Mathieu equation described in Example 2.6.3. Let the
   Lyapunov function candidate be given by




The origin is then shown to be a US equilibrium point.

3. The system given in Example 2.6.3–5, has a GES equilibrium point at
   the origin. This may be shown by considering a Lyapunov function
   candidate

                                             V(x)=x2

which leads to




Then,

                                          0.5x2V(x)2x2

and




The above inequalities hold for any x∈ℜn.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
72                                             Introduction to Control Theory

4. Let




and pick a Lyapunov function candidate




so that




so that the origin is SL.
                                                                             䊏

Lyapunov Theorems may be used to design controllers that will stabilize a
nonlinear system such as a robot. In fact, if one chooses a Lyapunov function
candidate V(t, x), then finding its total derivative V(t, x) will exhibit an
explicit dependence on the control signal. By choosing the control signal to
make V(t, x) negative definite, stability of the closed-loop system is
guaranteed. Unfortunately, it is not always easy to guarantee the global
asymptotic stability of an equilibrium point using Lyapunov Theorem. This
is due to the fact, that V(t, x) may be shown to be negative but not necessarily
negative-definite. If the open-loop system were autonomous, Lyapunov theory
is greatly simplified as shown in the next section.

The Autonomous Case
Suppose the open-loop system is not autonomous, i.e. is not explicitly
dependent on t, then a time-independent Lyapunov function candidate V(x)
may be obtained and the positive definite conditions are greatly simplified as
described next.

LEMMA 2.7–1: A time invariant continuous function V(x) is positive definite
if V(0)=0 and V(x)>0 for x≠0. It is locally positive definite if the above holds
in a neighborhood of the origin                                               䊏

  Note that the condition that V(0)=0 is not necessary and that as long as
V(0) is bounded above the Lyapunov results hold without modification.



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.7 Lyapunov Stability Theorems                                                    73

With the above simplification, the Lyapunov results hold except that no
distinction is made between uniform and regular stability results.

EXAMPLE 2.7–6: Uniform Stability via Lyapunov Functions
Consider again the damped pendulum described by




and obtain a state-space by choosing x1=θ and                          then a Lyapunov
function candidate is




so that                            and the origin is SL and actually USL.
                                                                                    䊏


EXAMPLE 2.7–7: Uniform Stability via Lyapunov Functions
This example illustrates the local asymptotic, uniform stability of the origin
for the system


                                                                                   (1)



Choose                                    then




which is strictly less than zero for all
                                                                                    䊏

Sometimes, and although V(x) is only non-positive, LaSalle’s theorem
[LaSale and Lefschetz 1961], [Khalil 2001] may be used to guarantee the
global asymptotic stability of the equilibrium point as described in the
next theorem.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
74                                            Introduction to Control Theory

THEOREM 2.7–2: LaSalle
  Given the autonomous nonlinear system




and let the origin be an equilibrium point. Then,

1. Asymptotic Stability: Suppose a Lyapunov function V(x) has been found
   such that for               , V(x)>0 and           Then the origin is
   asymptotically stable if and only if        only at x=0.
2. Global Asymptotic Stability: The origin is GAS if          above and
   V(x) is radially unbounded.
                                                                      䊏


Unfortunately, in many applications with time-varying trajectories, the open-
loop systems are not autonomous, and more advanced results such as the
ones described later will be called upon to show global asymptotic stability.

EXAMPLE 2.7–8: LaSalle Theorem
Consider the autonomous system




The origin is an equilibrium point. Moreover, consider a Lyapunov function
candidate




Leading to




Since          for all x1=x2, we need to check whether the origin is the only
point where            It can be seen from the state equation that x1=x2 can
only happen at the origin, therefore the origin is GAS.
                                                                           䊏



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.7 Lyapunov Stability Theorems                                                 75

   Note that LaSalle’s theorem is actually more general than we have
described. In fact, it can be used to ascertain the stability of sets rather than
just an equilibrium point. The basic idea is that since V(x) is lower bounded
V(x)>c, then the derivative V has to gradually vanish, and that the trajectory
is eventually confined to the set where V=0. The following definitions is
useful in explaining the more general LaSalle’s theorem.

DEFINITION 2.7–5 A set G is said to be an invariant set of a dynamical
system if every trajectory which starts in G remains in G.          䊏

As examples of invariant sets, we can give the whole state-space, an
equilibrium point and a limit cycle. By using this concept, LaSalle was able
to describe the convergence to sets rather than to just equilibrium points.
For example, we can use this result to show that the limit cycle is a stable
attracting set of the Van der Pol oscillator.

The Linear Time-Invariant Case
In the case where the system under consideration is linear and time-invariant,
Lyapunov theory is well developed and the choice of a Lyapunov function is
simple. In fact, in this case, the various stability concepts in definitions 2.6.1
are identical. Lyapunov theory then provides necessary as well as sufficient
conditions for stability as discussed in this section. For the proofs consult
[Khalil 2001].

THEOREM 2.7–3: Given a linear time-invariant system




The system is stable if and only if there exists a positive definite solution P to
the equation

                                          ATP+PA=-Q

where Q is an arbitrary positive-definite matrix.                               䊏

Note that the stability of the whole system was obtained in the last theorem
since in this case, the origin is the unique equilibrium point and its stability is
equivalent to the system being stable. In addition, no reference was made to
what kind of stability is implied since all stability concepts are equivalent in
the very special case of linear, time-invariant systems [Khalil 2001]. Also
note that this result is equivalent to testing that all eigenvalues of A have
negative real parts [Kailath 1980]. In the following, we include a table
summarizing Lyapunov Stability theorems.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
76                                                     Introduction to Control Theory

                                   Lyapunov Stability Theorems
1. Autonomous Systems:                        , such that
      •      The origin is an equilibrium point.
      •      The set                          .
      •      There exists V(x) continuous, continuously differentiate, V(0)=0




2. Non-autonomous Systems: x=f(t, x), such that
   • The origin is an equilibrium point at t=t0.
   • The set                          .
      •      There exists V(t, x) continuous, continuously differentiate in t and
             x, V(t, 0)=0
      •      α(||x||), ß(||x||), and γ(||x||) class K functions.




Lyapunov Theorems may be used to design controllers that can stabilize
linear time-invariant systems as described in the next example.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.7 Lyapunov Stability Theorems                                               77

EXAMPLE 2.7–9: Stability of PD Controllers for Rigid Robots
Consider the rigid robot example and the torque input of Example 2.3.2.
The resulting linear system is given by




The equilibrium point is xe=[0T 0T]T. It is then easy to find Kp and Kv to
stabilize the equilibrium point. In fact, let Q=I and consider the Lyapunov
equation of theorem 2.7.3

                                             ATP+PA=-I

which reduces to




where




The solution of these equations will provide a stabilizing controller for the
robot. In particular, the choices of Kp and Kv of Example 2.6.3(part 5) will
make the origin a GES equilibrium.
                                                                           䊏

Convergence Rate
Although Lyapunov stability theory does not directly give an indication of
the transient behavior of the system, it may actually be used to estimate the
convergence rate for linear systems. In order to see this, consider the following
inequalities which are a result of Rayleigh-Ritz theorem 2.5.2,

                                     xTλmin(P)xxT PxxT λmax(P)x        (2.7.2)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
78                                                           Introduction to Control Theory

then, note

                                                                                    (2.7.3)




Now, we can show by separation of variables and integrating that

                                          xTmin(P)xV(t)V(0)e-t                  (2.7.4)

or that


                                                                                    (2.7.5)


Therefore, x(t) is approaching the origin at rate faster than /2. In fact, it
can be shown that the fastest convergence rate estimate is obtained when
Q=I.

Krasovskii Theorem
There are some cases when a Lyapunov function for autonomous nonlinear
systems is easily obtained using Krasovkii’s theorem stated below.

THEOREM 2.7–4: Consider the autonomous nonlinear system x=f(x) with
the origin being an equilibrium point. Let A(x)=∂f/∂x. Then, a sufficient
condition for the origin to be AS is that there exists 2 symmetric positive-
definite matrices, P and Q such that for all x≠0, the matrix

                                           F(x)=A(x)TP+PA(x)+Q                          (1)

is 0 in some ball B about the origin. The function V(x)=f(x)TPf(x) is then a
Lyapunov function for the system. If B=     and if V(x) is radially unbounded
then the system is GAS.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.7 Lyapunov Stability Theorems                                          79

EXAMPLE 2.7–10: Krasovkii’s Theorem
Consider the nonlinear system described by




where f(0)=g(0)=0. Let us find the Jacobian matrix




Let P=I, Q=I and check the conditions on the system which would look
like




which should be 0.
                                                                          䊏
On the other hand, suppose we have the linear time-invariant system




The transfer function is then given by

                                          P(s)=C(sI-A)-1B

Note that P(s) is strictly-proper. The following stability result then holds
[Desoer and Vidyasagar 1975].

THEOREM 2.7–5: Suppose P(s) is a stable transfer function then

1. If u(t)∈L∞ i.e. u(t) is bounded, then so is y(t) and     .
2. If limt→∞ u(t)=0 then limt→∞ y(t)=0.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
80                                                             Introduction to Control Theory

3. If u(t)∈L2, then                                    .
                                                                                           䊏


EXAMPLE 2.7–11: Input/Output Stability of Rigid Robots
Consider the closed-loop robot of Example 2.7.9. Its input/output behavior
is described by a set of n decoupled differential equations




If                                             . Then the transfer function between each
Ui(s) and Qi(s) is




Note that all Pi(s) are stable if kvi and kpi are both positive. Assume for the
purposes of illustration that kvi=3 and kpi=2, and that ui=sin (t). Note that ui
is bounded and let us find the output yi(t).

                                yi(t)=-0.2e-2t+0.5e-t-0.32 cos(t+0.32)

which is bounded above by 0.62 and below by -0.02. The derivative of y(t)
is also bounded. On the other hand, suppose the input is ui(t)=e-3t then the
output is

                                          yi(t)=0.5e-t-e-2t+0.5e-3t

Since limt→∞ ui(t)=0, then so is limt→∞ yi(t)=0.
                                                                                           䊏


2.8 Input/Output Stability

When dealing with nonlinear systems, stability in the sense of Lyapunov
does not necessarily imply that a bounded input will result in a bounded
output. This fact is shown in the next example.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.8 Input/Output Stability                                                 81

EXAMPLE 2.8–1: Input/Output Versus Lyapunov Stability
Consider the time-varying system




The system is asymptotically stable with a single equilibrium point at ye=0.
On the other hand, a unit step input (which is definitely bounded) starting at
t=0 will lead to the response




which grows unbounded as t increases.
                                                                           䊏
Therefore, we need to discuss the conditions under which a bounded input
will result in a bounded output [Boyd and Barratt], [Desoer and Vidyasagar
1975]. This was actually presented when discussing the system-induced
norms (see Definition 2.5.7) and the current discussion should serve to
contrast these concepts with Lyapunov stability. Consider the nonlinear
system

                                                                       (2.8.1)
                                 y(t)=g[x(t), t, u(t)]                 (2.8.2)

DEFINITION 2.8–1 The dynamical system (2.8.1) is bounded-input-
bounded-output (BIBO) stable if for any

                                             ||u(t)||M<8

there exist finite γ>0 and b such that

                                             ||y(t)||γM+b
                                                                           䊏

Note that BIBO stability implies the uniform boundedness of all equilibrium
states.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
82                                                     Introduction to Control Theory

EXAMPLE 2.8–2: BIBO Stability
Consider the system

                                          y(t)=u2(t)

It is BIBO stable since for any input u(t) such that |u(t)|<M<∞, the output is
bounded by M2.
                                                                           䊏


2.9 Advanced Stability Results

In this section we review some advanced stability concepts. These results
will be used in showing the closed-loop stability of systems when robust or
adaptive controllers are used. If the reader is only interested in implementing
these controllers, this section may be skipped. On the other hand, anyone
interested in designing new controllers should be aware of the results presented
here.

Passive Systems
Given a nonlinear system shown in Figure 2.9.1, we are interested in studying
the stability of such a system based on input-output measurements only.
Motivated by energy concepts in network theory, such as


     [Stored Energy]=[External Power Input]+[Internal power Generation]


One can study the internal stability of all kinds of systems. In general,
the external power input is the scalar product yTu of an input effort or
flow u and an output flow or effort y. The last equation then takes on the
form

                                                                              (2.9.1)

In many cases (e.g. isolated system) g(t)=0 and one can use the stored
Energy


                                                                              (2.9.2)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.9 Advanced Stability Results                                                 83




                  Figure 2.9.1: Input-output description of nonlinear system



as a Lyapunov function candidate.
   The passivity of nonlinear systems was defined as follows [Narendra and
Taylor 1973], [Ortega et al. 1998].

DEFINITION 2.9–1 Consider the system shown in Figure 2.9.1 and assume
that it has the same number of inputs and outputs i.e. u(t) and y(t) have the
same dimension.

1. Passivity: The system is said to be passive if




      for all finite T>0 and some γ>-∞.

2. Strict Passivity: The system is said to be strictly passive if there exists a
   δ>0 and γ>-∞ such that




      for all finite T>0.
                                                                               䊏


EXAMPLE 2.9–1: Passivity of Rigid Robots
Consider again the robot equation




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
84                                                       Introduction to Control Theory

  Suppose the robot is representing a system whose input is  and whose
output is the joint velocity q. Let the sum of the kinetic energy and potential
energy of the robot be denote by the Hamiltonian H and recall [Ortega and
Spong 1988]




then




which proves that from  to q, the rigid robot is a passive system.
                                                                                     䊏
A passive system is in effect one that does not create energy.

Positive-Real Systems
If the system under consideration is linear and time-invariant, then passivity
is equivalent to positivity and may be tested in the frequency domain
[Narendra and Taylor 1973]. In fact, let us describe positive-real systems
and discuss some of their properties. Consider the multi-input-multi-output
linear time-invariant system




where x is an n vector, u is an m vector, y is a p vector, A, B, C, and D are of
the appropriate dimensions. The corresponding transfer function matrix is

                                          P(s)=C(sI-A)-1B+D

We will assume that the system has an equal number of inputs and outputs,
i.e. p=m. To simplify our notation we will denote the Hermitian part of a
real, rational transfer matrix T(s) by                            where s*
is the complex conjugate of s. A number of definitions have been given for
SPR functions and matrices [Narendra and Taylor 1973]. It appears that the
most useful definition for control applications is the following.

DEFINITION 2.9–2 An m×m matrix T(s) of proper real rational functions
which is not identically zero is positive-real or PR if


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.9 Advanced Stability Results                                              85

1. All elements of T(s) have no poles in the region Re(s)>0,
2. Any poles of T(s) on the jw axis are simple with positive-definite residues,
   and
3. The matrix He[T(s)] is positive semidefinite for Re(s)>0.
                                                                             䊏


EXAMPLE 2.9–2: PR Matrices
Consider the matrix




This matrix is PR as can be checked.

DEFINITION 2.9–3 An m×m matrix T(s) of proper real rational functions
which is not identically zero is strictly-positive-real or SPR if

1. All elements of T(s) have no poles in the region Re(s)0, and
2. The matrix He[T(s)] is positive definite for Re(s)>0.
                                                                            䊏


EXAMPLE 2.9–3: SPR Matrices
Consider the matrix




This matrix is SPR as can be checked.
                                                                            䊏


Lure’s Problem
Consider the following feedback interconnected system



                                                                       (2.9.3)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
86                                           Introduction to Control Theory

where φ is continuous in both arguments. Lure then stated the following
Absolute Stability problem which became known as Lure’s Problem: Suppose
the system described by the above equations is given where:

1. All eigenvalues of A have negative real parts or that A has one eigen-
   value at the origin while the rest of them is in the open left-half plane
   (OLHP), and
2. (A, b) is controllable, and
3. (c, A) is observable, and
4. The nonlinearity φ(.,.) satisfies

      (a) φ(t,0)=0; t0 and
      (b)

Then, find conditions on the linear system (A, B, C, D) such that x=0 is a
GAS equilibrium point of the closed-loop system.
   Note that sometimes when we know more about the nonlinearity φ, the
last condition above is replaced by the following:




where k2k10 are constants. We then say that φ belongs to the sector
[k1, k2].
   The first attempt to solve this problem was made by Aizerman in what is
now known as Aizerman’s conjecture [Vidyasagar 1992] followed by the
efforts of Kalman [Vidyasagar 1992]. The correct solution however, was not
available until the
   In order to present the correct results, we need to present the KY and
MKY lemmas.

The MKY Lemma
The following lemmas are versions of the Meyer-Kalman-Yakubovich
(MKY) lemma which appears in [Narendra and Taylor 1973], [Khalil 2001]
amongst other places, and will be useful in designing adaptive controllers
for robots.

LEMMA 2.9–1: Meyer-Kalman-Yakubovitch Let the system (2.9.3) with
D=0 be controllable. Then the transfer function c(sI-A)-1b is SPR if and
only if




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.9 Advanced Stability Results                                                87

1. For any symmetric, positive-definite Q, there exists a symmetric, positive-
   definite P solution of the Lyapunov equation

                                          ATP+PA=-Q

2. The matrices B and C satisfy

                                           C=BTP

                                                                              䊏

The MKY Lemma gives conditions under which a transfer matrix has a
degree of robustness. Note that the conditions depend on both the input and
output matrices and thus a particular system may be SPR for a certain choice
of input/output pairs and not SPR for others. A modified version of the KY
lemma which relaxes the condition of controllability is given next.

LEMMA 2.9–2: Meyer-Kalman-Yakubovitch Given vector b, an
asymptotically stable A, a real vector v, scalars γ0 and >0, and a positive-
definite matrix Q, then, there exist a vector q and a symmetric positive definite
P such that

1.



2.



if and only if

1. is small enough and,

2. the transfer function γ/2+vT(sI-A)-1b is SPR
                                                                              䊏


In most of our applications, q=0. These lemmas find many applications in
nonlinear systems. It is usually possible to divide a nonlinear system into a
linear feed-forward subsystem, and a nonlinear, passive feedback. The
challenge is then to make the linear subsystem SPR so that the stability of the
combined system is guaranteed.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
88                                                       Introduction to Control Theory




             Figure 2.9.2: Feedback interconnection of two nonlinear systems.




2.10 Useful Theorems and Lemmas

Consider the block diagram shown in Figure 2.9.2. The blocks labelled H1
and H2 represent two systems (linear or nonlinear) which operate on the
inputs e1 and e2 as follows

                                          y1=H1e1=H1(u1-y2)

                                          y2=H2e2-H2(u2+y1)

Let H1 be an m×p matrix function, and H2 be a p×m matrix function.
Therefore, u1 and y2 are p×11 vectors, while u2 and y1 are m×11 vectors. The
first theorem gives sufficient conditions to guarantee that the closed-loop
system shown in Figure 2.9.2 is BIBO stable and is given in [Desoer and
Vidyasagar 1975].

Small-Gain Theorem
THEOREM 2.10–1: Small gain Theorem Let H1:                                    and H2:
       . Therefore H1 and H2 satisfy the inequalities




for all T [0,∞) and suppose that                               . If




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.10 Useful Theorems and Lemmas                                                       89

Then e1, y2,                 and y1,            .                                      䊏
   Basically, the small-gain theorem states that a feedback interconnection
of two systems is BIBO stable if the loop-gain is less than unity. In other
words, if a signal traverses the feedback-loop and decreases in magnitude
then the closed-loop system can not go unstable.

EXAMPLE 2.10–1: Applications of Small-Gain Theorem
Let the feedback connection of Figure 2.9.2 be such that




Then, we can show that

                                             γ1=0.5; ß1=0


                                             γ2=1; ß2=1.

Since γ1γ2=0.5<1, the feedback connection is BIBO stable.
                                                                                       䊏

The next theorem provides a test for the stability of a nonlinear system based
on the stability of its linear part. In fact, a certain degree of robustness is
achieved if the linear system is exponentially stable as described in [Anderson
et al. 1986].

Total Stability Theorem
THEOREM 2.10–2: Total Stability Consider the state-space system
described by




where

1. The system                             is exponentially stable i.e. there are some a>0
   and K1, such that

                                          ||x(t)|| Ke-at; t0


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
90                                                          Introduction to Control Theory

2. f(t, 0)=0 i.e. the origin is an equilibrium point of f(t, x)
3. || f(t, x1)-f(t, x2)||ß1||x1-x2||, for some ß1>0
4. ||g(t, x1)||ß2r, for some ß2>0
5. ||g(t, x1)-g(t, x2)ß2 ||x1-x2||
6.
Then, there exists a unique solution x(t) to 1.5.5 and




                                                                                        䊏
The total stability theorem will be used to design controllers that will
make the linear part of the system exponentially stable. In effect, this
theorem guarantees that if the linear part of the system is “very” stable
(exponentially stable), the destabilizing effect of the bounded
nonlinearities may not be sufficient to destabilize the system and the state
will remain bounded.

EXAMPLE 2.10–2: Total Stability
Consider the nonlinear system




Let |x0|<1, and note the following

                                          K=1; a=2; ß1=0.5; ß2=1.

Note first that all conditions of the theorem are satisfied, then there exists a
unique solution x(t) which is bounded by




                                                                                        䊏

A version of the Bellman-Gronwall lemma is proved in [Sastry and Bodson
1989] and is presented next.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.10 Useful Theorems and Lemmas                                           91

LEMMA 2.10–1: Bellman-Gronwall Let x(.), a(.), b(.): [0, 8) → [0, 8), and
T0. Suppose that for all t [0,T], the following inequality holds




Then for all t [0,T]




If b(t) is further a constant, the following holds




                                                                           䊏

EXAMPLE 2.10–3: Bellman-Gronwall Lemma Example
Consider a LTI system given by




and assume that A is a stable matrix. Then the solution of the state equation
is given by




or




which, when taking the norm of each side becomes




We can then use the Bellman-Gronwall lemma by letting
                         to obtain



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
92                                           Introduction to Control Theory




or finally



                                                                          䊏
The next Lemma may be used in the case of non-autonomous systems and
leads to results similar to LaSalle’s theorem. For a proof see for example
[Khalil 2001]

LEMMA 2.10–2: Barbalat Let f(t) be a differentiate function of t.

•     First Version: If                   is uniformly continuous and
                        , then
•     Second Version: If f(t)0,                and        bounded, then

                                                                          䊏


EXAMPLE 2.10–4: Barbalat Lemma Example
1. Consider f(t)=e-t+1, then dot f(t)=-e-t which is uniformly continuous. On
   the other hand limt→∞(e-t+1)=1 therefore                    .
2. As a second example, consider f(t)=1/(1+t), with t>0. Using the second
   version of Barbalat’s lemma, we can show that                     .
                                                                           䊏


LEMMA 2.10–3: Consider the quadratic equation




where a, b, and c are positive constants. Then P(x)<0 if




for all x1<x<x2 where




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.11 Linear Controller Design                                                93

                                                                             䊏


THEOREM 2.10–3: Let V(x) be a Lyapunov function of a continuous-time
system that satisfies the following properties:




then x(t) is uniformlt bounded                                               䊏

THEOREM 2.10–4: Let V(x) be a Lyapunov function of a continuous-time
system that satisfies the following properties:




where η is a positive constant, γ1 and γ2 are continuous, strictly increasing
functions, and γ3 is a continuous, nondecreasing function. Then, if




x(t) is uniformly ultimately bounded. In addition, if x(0)=0, x(t) is uniformly
bounded.                                                                    䊏


2.11 Linear Controller Design

The purpose of control design is to make the robot respond in a predictable
and desirable fashion to a set of input signals. In this section we review how
a linear controller may be designed in order that the behavior of the robot-
controller combination is acceptable. It seems obvious that the firs requirement
on the robot-controller is its stability. Therefore, the first function of the
controller is to stabilize the robot when it is moving in space. In fact, we can
now pose the problem we wish to solve:




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
94                                                     Introduction to Control Theory

Linear Control Design Problem: Consider a LTI system. Design a feedback
controller that operates on the output y(t) without differentiation, and
generates an input u(t) so that the system goes from any initial state x(0) to
a specified desired final state xd in some finite time. This problem has 2 parts
to it:

1. Controllability: Can the problem be solved if y=x?
2. Observability: If so, how do I get x from y?

In the next section we introduce these concepts and find tests that will allow
us to answer the questions posed. Given is a MIMO LTI system


                                                                             (2.11.1)


where                   ,                 ,   and A, B, C, D are of the appropriate
dimensions.

DEFINITION 2.11–1 A state x0 is controllable if there exists an input u(t),
for 0tt1 such that x(t1)=0, for some finite t1. The system itself is said to be
controllable if all        are controllable.                                   䊏

Note that the input u(t) is not a feedback function of the state x(t). Let us
recall the solution of the differential equation given by




and evaluate it at t1 assuming that x0 is controllable so that x(t1)=0 to
obtain


                                                                             (2.11.2)


Therefore, if x0 is controllable, it has to satisfy the last equation. This however
is not an easy test. Fortunately, we have a much simpler test given in the
following theorem.

THEOREM 2.11–1: A necessary and sufficient condition for the complete
controllability of the LTI systems is that, The n×nm matrix




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.11 Linear Controller Design                                              95




                                                                           (1)

is full rank, i. e. rankC=n
                                                                           䊏
   Next, We show that controllability is sufficient to stabilize the system
(2.11.1) by placing the eigenvalues of the A matrix

THEOREM 2.11–2: Let (A, b) be controllable. Then, there exists a constant
gain matrix K such that u=-Kx+v will place the eigenvalues of A-bk anywhere
in the s plane.                                                          䊏

   The state-feedback gain needed to place the eigenvalues may be found in
the single-input case using Ackermann’s formula (see for example [Antsaklis
and Michel 1997]). Assume the desired closed-loop eigenvalues are specified
as the roots of the equation

                                                                   (2.11.3)

Then, the state-feedback controller is given by


                                                                   (2.11.4)


where C is the controllability matrix of (2.11.1), and φ(Α) is the matrix
obtained by evaluating φ(s) at A, i.e.

                                                                   (2.11.5)

EXAMPLE 2.11–1: Control Design for Double Integrator
Consider the double integrator system




Suppose that the desired closed-loop poles are the roots of the equation




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
96                                            Introduction to Control Theory




Then by Ackermann’s formula



                                                                           (1)

                                                                           䊏
Next, we introduce the concept of observability and find an observability
test.

DEFINITION 2.11–2 The state x(0)=x0 is said to be observable if knowledge
of u(t), y(t); 0t1 is enough to uniquely determine x0. Note that once x(0) is
known, so is x(t) for t0. The system is said to be completely observable if
every initial state is observable.                                         䊏

  This problem is a dual problem to the controllability problem as will
become obvious in the following.

THEOREM 2.11–3: A necessary and sufficient condition for the complete
observability of the LTI systems is that The np×n matrix




                                                                           (1)




is full rank, i.e.                                                         䊏

EXAMPLE 2.11–2: Observer-Controller Design
Consider the system




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.11 Linear Controller Design                                             97

then




Therefore, this system is controllable but not observable. On the other hand,
the system




then




so this one is observable but not controllable. The trouble is that both of
these realizations have the same transfer function H(s)=c(sI-A)-1b= s/s2=s!.
                                                                           䊏
   Suppose we have 2 realizations of the transfer function H(s) related by a
state-space transformation,


                                                                    (2.11.6)


and




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
98                                                        Introduction to Control Theory

                                                             -
Then, let us find the controllability matrix              of Σ


                                                                                (2.11.7)


Therefore, rankC=rank , and controllability is therefore preserved under
state-space transformation.
   By combining the concepts of observability and controllability, we can
design compensators that solve the Linear Control Design problem. In fact,
the following theorem summarizes linear control design.

THEOREM 2.11–4: The Linear Control Design problem is solvable for a
system 2.11.1, if and only if the state-space realization is both observable
and controllable.                                                         䊏

These compensators are known as the observer-controller compensators and
are shown for example in Figure 2.11.1. In the SISO case, a transfer function
admits a state-space realization which is completely observable and
controllable if and only if no pole-zero cancellations occur [Kailath 1980],
[Antsaklis and Michel 1997]. The next example shows an observer-controller
compensator chosen to obtain desired closed-loop poles.




                                          Figure 2.11.1



EXAMPLE 2.11–3: Observer-Controller Design
Consider again the double integrator system. It is easily verified that it is a
controllable and observable system. Suppose that the desired closed-loop
poles are the roots of the equation




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.11 Linear Controller Design                                                99




This can be achieved using the structure of Figure 2.11.1 using the gain
               found in Example 2.11.1                                䊏

The double integrator system being both controllable and observable, also’
lends itself to the most general controller design technique for linear systems,
namely the two-degree -f freedom (2-DOF) design. This allows the
controlled closed-loop system to match any desired model as descried in
[Kailath 1980]. This approach goes beyond the pole or eigenvalue placement
designs, as one can now move both poles and zeros, a goal not achievable
with the observer-controller compensators. This design is illustrated in the
following example.

EXAMPLE 2.11–4: Two DOF Design
Consider again the double integrator system, and assume the desired closed-
loop transfer function is given by




where a, b, kv, and kp are given constants. Then using the model-following
configuration in Figure 2.11.2, and simplifying terms, we obtain




                                          Figure 2.11.2




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
100                                                      Introduction to Control Theory

    or

                                (s2+kvs+kp)Q(s)=(as+b)[s2R(s)+S(s)].

   At this stage, we may choose for example R(s)=1 and suppose for the
purpose of illustration that a=b=kp=1 and that kv=9. Then we solve for S(s)=9s
and Q(s)=s. Note that in this case, the feedback block S(s)/R(s) is improper
but this does not cause any problems in cases (such as robot control) where
velocity measurements are available.
                                                                            䊏
The question addressed next is to find conditions on (2.11.1) so that a
static-output feedback controller will render the closed-loop system SPR.
We will consider the SISO case only since this is the only case encountered
in this book.


                                                                               (2.11.8)


or in the frequency-domain


                                                                               (2.11.9)


We present a simple frequency domain result to show the existence of K and
γ that will render the closed-loop system SPR. The result first appeared in
[Gu 1988].

THEOREM 2.11–5: Let system (2.2.11) have no common poles and zeros.
Then there exists a nonsingular K and a positive scalar γ such that the closed-
loop system (2.11.8, 2.11.9) is SPR, if and only if P(s) has no zeros in the
right half plane and if P(s) has n poles and n - 1 zeros. In fact, one such K is
given by

                                            K=P(CB)-1

where P is any symmetric, positive-definite matrix.                                  䊏




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2.12 Summary and Notes                                                       101

EXAMPLE 2.11-5: SPR Design
Consider the double integrator system




where c2≠0 and c1, c2 are of the same sign. The open-loop transfer function is
then




which has relative degree 1 and is minimum phase. Note that CB=c2 which is
invertible. The gain K is chosen to be




where p>0. The closed-loop system is then




which is stable for any choice of γ>0 and is SPR if γ>c1/(pc2 (check!).
                                                                              䊏


2.12 Summary and Notes

This chapter is meant to be a review of various control theory concepts that
will be used in the remainder of the book. The emphasis has been to include
enough material so that readers with little or no background in control theory
are able to follow the design of robot controllers. Simplifications were often
made to concentrate on the systems studied in this book, namely, mechanical
systems and systems described by the Lagrange-Euler equations. In particular,
the double integrator system was illustrated in detail, since it will result from
applying a preliminary nonlinear feedback on mechanical manipulators. In
Chapter 3, we introduce the dynamical description of rigid robot



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
102                                          Introduction to Control Theory

manipulators, and in subsequent chapters, the control concepts reviewed in
this chapter will be implemented on those manipulators.
   Most of the results reviewed here can be found in greater details in the
books by [Kailath 1980], [Antsaklis and Michel 1997] for the linear systems
case, and in [Khalil 2001], [Vidyasagar 1992] in the nonlinear systems case.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES

[Anderson et al. 1986] B.D.O.Anderson and R.Bitmead and C.R.Johnson,
   Jr. and P.V.Kokotovic and R.L.Kosut and I.M.Y.Mareels and L.Praly
   and B.D.Riedle. “Stability of Adaptive Systems: Passivity and Averaging
   Analysis”. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1986.

[Antsaklis and Michel 1997] P.Antsaklis and A.N.Michel. “Linear Systems”.
    McGraw Hill, New York, 1997.

[Åström and Wittenmark 1995] K.Åström and B.Wittenmark. “Adaptive
    Control”. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 2nd edition, 1995.

[Åström and Wittenmark 1996] K.Åström and B.Wittenmark. “Computer-
    Controlled Systems: Theory and Design”, Prentice-Hall, Englewood
    Cliffs, NJ, 1996.

[Boyd and Barratt] S.Boyd and G.Barratt. “Linear Controller Design: Limits
    of Performance”, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1991.

[Desoer and Vidyasagar 1975] C.Desoer and M.Vidyasagar. “Feedack
   Systems: Input-Output Properties”, Academic Press, New York, 1975.

[Franklin et al. 1997] G.Franklin and D.Powell and M.Workman. “Digital
    Control of Dynamic Systems”, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1997.

[Gu 1988] G.Gu. “Stabilizability Conditions for Multivariable Uncertain
   systems via Output Feedback”, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. AC-
   35, pp. 988–992, 1988.

[Hahn 1967] W.Hahn. “Theory and Applications of Lyapunov’s Direct
   Method”. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1967.

[Horn and Johnson 1991] R.Horn and C.Johnson. “Topics in Matrix
   Analysis”. Cambridge University Press, New York, 1991.



                                                                      103
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
104                                                          REFERENCES

[Kailath 1980] T.Kailath. “Linear Systems”. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
    NJ, 1980.

[Khalil 2001]. H.Khalil. “Nonlinear Systems”. Prentice-Hall, Englewood
   Cliffs, NJ, 2001.

[LaSale and Lefschetz 1961] P.LaSale and S.Lefschetz. “Stability by
   Lyapunov’s Direct Method”. Academic Press, New York, 1961.

[Ljung 1999] L.Ljung. “System Identification-Theory for the User”. Prentice-
    Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1999.

[Narendra and Taylor 1973] K.S.Narendra and J.H.Taylor. “Frequency
   Domain Criteria for Absolute Stability”. Academic Press, New York,
   1973.

[Niculescu and Abdallah 2000] S.-I.Niculescu and C.T.Abdallah. “Delay
    Effects on Static Output Feedback Stabilization”. Submitted IEEE CDC
    2000, Sydney, Australia, 2000.

[Ortega and Spong 1988] R.Ortega and M.Spong. “Adaptive Motion Control
    of Rigid Robots: A Tutorial”. Proc. IEEE Conf. Dec. and Cont., pp.
    1575–1584, 1988.

[Ortega et al. 1998] R.Ortega and A.Loria and P.J.Nicklasson and H.Sira-
    Ramirez. “Passivity-based Control of Euler-Lagrange Systems”. Springer-
    Verlag, Berlin, 1998.

[Strang 1988] G.Strang. “Linear Algebra and its Applications”. Brooks/Cole,
     Stamford, CT, 1988.

[Koltchinskii et al. 1999] V.Koltchinskii and C.T.Abdallah and M.Ariola
    and P.Dorato and D.Panchenko. “Statistical Learning Control of
    Uncertain Systems: It is better than it seems”. IEEE Trans, on Automatic
    Control, February 1999.

[Sastry and Bodson 1989] S.Sastry and M.Bodson. “Adaptive Control:
    Stability, Convergence, and Robustness”. Prentice-Hall, Englewood
    Cliffs, NJ, 1989.

[ATM 1996] “ATM Forum Traffic Management Specification”. ATM Forum
   Traffic Management Working Group AF-TM-0056.000, version 4.0,
   April 1996.

[Niculescu et al. 1997] S.-I.Niculescu and E.Verriest and L.Dugard and J.-
    M.Dion. “Stability and robust stability of time-delay systems: A guided
    tour”. LNCIS, Springer-Verlag, London, vol. 228, pp. 1–71, 1997.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES                                                         105

[CDC 1999] “CDC 1999 Special session on time-delay systems”. Proc. 1999
   CDC, Phoenix, AZ, 1999.

[Verhulst 1997] H.Verhulst. “Nonlinear Differential Equations and
    Dynamical Systems”. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1997.

[Vidyasagar 1992] M.Vidyasagar. “Nonlinear Systems Analysis”. Prentice-
    Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1992.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
