Chapter 1

Commercial Robot
Manipulators
This chapter sets the stage for this book by providing an overview of
commercially available robotic manipulators, sensors, and controllers. We
make the point that if one desires high performance flexible robotic workcells,
then it is necessary to design advanced control systems for robot manipulators
such as are found in this book.


1.1 Introduction

When studying advanced techniques for robot control, planning, sensors,
and human interfacing, it is important to be aware of the systems that are
commercially available. This allows one to develop new technology in the
context of existing technology, which allows one to implement the new
techniques on existing robotic systems.
   A National Association of Manufacturer’s report [NAM 1998] states that
the two most important drivers for US commercial business manufacturing
success in the 1990’s have been reconfigurable manufacturing workcells and
local area networks in the factory. In this chapter we discuss flexible robotic
workcells, commercial robot configurations, commercial robot controllers,
information integration to the internet, and robot workcell sensors. More
information on these topics can be found in the Mechanical Engineering
Handbook [Lewis 1998] and the Computer Science Engineering Handbook
[Lewis and Fitzgerald 1997].



                                                                             1
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
2                                                    Commercial Robot Manipulators

Flexible Robotic Workcells
In factory automation and elsewhere it was once common to use fixed
layouts built around conveyors or other transportation systems in which
each robot performed a specific task. These assembly lines had distinct
workstations, each performing a dedicated function. Robots have been
used at the workstation level to perform operations such as assembly,
drilling, surface finishing, welding, palletizing, and so on. In the assembly
line, parts are routed sequentially to the workstations by the transport
system. Such systems are very expensive to install, require a cadre of
engineering experts to design and program, and are extremely difficult to
modify or reprogram as needs change. In today’s high-mix low-volume
(HMLV) manufacturing scenario, these characteristics tolled the death knell
for such rigid antiquated designs.




                    Figure 1.1.1: UTA’s Automation and Robotics Test Cell.


   In the assembly line, the robot is restricted by placing it into a rigid
sequential system. Robots are versatile machines with many capabilities,
and their potential can be significantly increased by using them as a basis
for flexible robotic workcells [Decelle 1988], [Jamshidi et al. 1992], [Pugh
1983] such as the UTA Automation and Robotics Test Cell in Figure 1.1.1.
In the flexible robotic workcell, robots are used for part handling, assembly,
and other process operations. By reprogramming the robots one changes the
entire functionality of the workcell. The workcell is designed to make full
use of the workspace of the robots, and components such as milling machines,
drilling machines, vibratory part feeders, and so on are placed within the
robots’ workspaces to allow servicing by the robots. Contrary to the assembly
line, the physical layout does not impose a priori a fixed sequencing of the
operations or jobs. Thus, as product requirements change, all that is required
is to reprogram the workcell in software [Mireles and Lewis 2001]. The



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
1.2 Commercial Robot Configurations and Types                               3

workcell is ideally suited to emerging HMLV conditions in manufacturing
and elsewhere.
   The rising popularity of robotic workcells has taken emphasis away from
hardware design and placed new emphasis on innovative software techniques
and architectures that include planning, coordination, and control (PC&C)
functions. A great deal of research into robot controllers has been required
to give robots the flexibility, precision, and functionality needed in modern
flexible workcells. The remainder of this book details such advanced control
techniques.


1.2 Commercial Robot Configurations and Types

Much of the information in this section was prepared by Mick Fitzgerald,
who was then Manager at UTA’s Automation and Robotics Research Institute
(ARRI).
   Robots are highly reliable, dependable and technologically advanced
factory equipment. The majority of the world’s robots are supplied by
established companies using reliable off-the-shelf component technologies.
All commercial industrial robots have two physically separate basic
elements—the manipulator arm and the controller. The basic architecture of
most commercial robots is fundamentally the same, and consists of digital
servocontrolled electrical motor drives on serial-link kinematic machines,
usually with no more than six axes (degrees of freedom). All are supplied
with a proprietary controller. Virtually all robot applications require
significant design and implementation effort by engineers and technicians.
What makes each robot unique is how the components are put together to
achieve performance that yields a competitive product. The most important
considerations in the application of an industrial robot center on two issues:
manipulation and integration.

Manipulator Performance
The combined effects of kinematic structure, axis drive mechanism design,
and real-time motion control determine the major manipulation performance
characteristics: reach and dexterity, pay load, quickness, and precision.
Caution must be used when making decisions and comparisons based on
manufacturers’ published performance specifications because the methods
for measuring and reporting them are not standardized across the industry.
Usually motion testing, simulations, or other analysis techniques are used to
verify performance for each application.
   Reach is characterized by measuring the extent of the workspace described
by the robot motion and dexterity by the angular displacement of the




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
4                                            Commercial Robot Manipulators

individual joints. Some robots will have unusable spaces such as dead zones,
singular poses, and wrist-wrap poses inside of the boundaries of their reach.
   Payload weight is specified by the manufacturers of all industrial robots.
Some manufacturers also specify inertial loading for rotational wrist axes. It
is common for the payload to be given for extreme velocity and reach
conditions. Weight and inertia of all tooling, workpieces, cables and hoses
must be included as part of the payload.
   Quickness is critical in determining throughput but difficult to determine
from published robot specifications. Most manufacturers will specify a
maximum speed of either individual joints or for a specific kinematic tool
point. However, average speed in a working cycle is the quickness
characteristic of interest.
   Precision is usually characterized by measuring repeatability. Virtually
all robot manufacturers specify static position repeatability. Accuracy is
rarely specified, but it is likely to be at least four times larger than
repeatability. Dynamic precision, or the repeatability and accuracy in
tracking position, velocity, and acceleration over a continuous path, is not
usually specified.

Common Kinematic Configurations
All common commercial industrial robots are serial-link manipulators,
usually with no more than six kinematically coupled axes of motion. By
convention, the axes of motion are numbered in sequence as they are
encountered from the base on out to the wrist. The first three axes account
for the spatial positioning motion of the robot; their configuration
determines the shape of the space through which the robot can be positioned.
Any subsequent axes in the kinematic chain generally provide rotational
motions to orient the end of the robot arm and are referred to as wrist
axes. In a robotic wrist, three axes usually intersect to generate true
independent positioning in terms of 3-D orientation. See Appendix A for a
kinematic analysis of the spherical robot wrist mechanism. Note that in
our 3-dimensional space, one requires three degrees of freedom for fully
independent spatial positioning and three degrees of freedom for fully
independent orientational positioning.
   There are two primary types of motion that a robot axis can produce
in its driven link- either revolute or prismatic. Revolute joints are
anthropomorphic (e.g. like human joints) while prismatic joints are able
to extend and retract like a car radio antenna. It is often useful to classify
robots according to the orientation and type of their first three axes.
There are four very common commercial robot configurations:
Articulated, Type I SCARA, Type II SCARA, and Cartesian. Two other
configurations, Cylindrical and Spherical, are now much less common.



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
1.2 Commercial Robot Configurations and Types                                  5




Figure 1.2.1: Articulated Arm. Six-axis CRS A465 arm (courtesy of CRS
robotics).




Figure 1.2.2: Type I SCARA Arm. High precision, high speed midsized SCARA I.
(courtesy of Adept Technologies, Inc.).


   Appendix C contains the dynamics of some common robot manipulators
for use in controls simulation in this book.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
6                                              Commercial Robot Manipulators

Articulated Arms. The variety of commercial articulated arms, most of
which have six axes, is very large (Fig. 1.2.1). All of these robots’ axes
are re volute. The second and third axes are co-planar and work together
to produce motion in a vertical plane. The first axis in the base is vertical
and revolves the arm to sweep out a large work volume. Many different
types of drive mechanisms have been devised to allow wrist and forearm
drive motors and gearboxes to be mounted close to the first and second
axis of rotation, thus minimizing the extended mass of the arm. The
workspace efficiency of well designed articulated arms, which is the degree
of quick dexterous reach with respect to arm size, is unsurpassed by other
arm configurations when five or more degrees of freedom are needed. A
major limiting factor in articulated arm performance is that the second
axis has to work to lift both the subsequent arm structure and the pay
load. Historically, articulated arms have not been capable of achieving
accuracy as high as other arm configurations, as all axes have joint angle
position errors which are multiplied by link radius and accumulated for
the entire arm.

Type I SCARA. The Type I SCARA (selectively compliant assembly robot
arm) arm, Figure 1.2.2, uses two parallel revolute joints to produce motion
in the horizontal plane. The arm structure is weight-bearing but the first and
second axes do no lifting. The third axis of the Type I SCARA provides work
volume by adding a vertical or z axis. A fourth revolute axis will add rotation
about the z axis to control orientation in the horizontal plane. This type of
robot is rarely found with more than four axes. The Type I SCARA is used
extensively in the assembly of electronic components and devices, and it is
used broadly for the assembly of small- and mediumsized mechanical
assemblies.

Type II SCARA. The Type II SCARA, Figure 1.2.3, also a four axis
configuration, differs from Type I in that the first axis is a long vertical
prismatic z stroke which lifts the two parallel revolute axis and their links.
For quickly moving heavier loads (over approximately 75 pounds) over longer
distance (more than about three feet), the Type II SCARA configuration is
more efficient than the Type I.

Cartesian Coordinate Robots. Cartesian coordinate robots use orthogonal
prismatic axes, usually referred to as x, y, and z, to translate their end-effector
or payload through their rectangular workspace. One, two, or three revolute
wrist axes may be added for orientation. Commercial robot companies supply
several types of Cartesian coordinate robots with workspace sizes ranging
from a few cubic inches to tens of thousands of cubic feet, and payloads
ranging to several hundred pounds. Gantry robots, which have an elevated
bridge structure, are the most common Cartesian style and are well suited to


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
1.2 Commercial Robot Configurations and Types                                      7




           Figure 1.2.3: Type II SCARA (courtesy of Adept Technologies, Inc.).




Figure 1.2.4: Cartesian Robot. Three-axis robot constructed from modular single-
axis motion modules (courtesy of Adept Technologies, Inc.).




material handling applications where large areas and/or large loads must be
serviced. They are particularly useful in applications such as arc welding,
waterjet cutting, and inspection of large complex precision parts.
   Modular Cartesian robots, see Figure 1.2.4, are also commonly available
from several commercial sources. Each module is a self-contained completely




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
8                                              Commercial Robot Manipulators

functional single-axis actuator; the modules may be custom assembled for
special-purpose applications.

Spherical and Cylindrical Coordinate Robots. The first two axes of the
spherical coordinate robot, Figure 1.2.5, are revolute and orthogonal to
one another, and the third axis provides prismatic radial extension. The
result is a natural spherical coordinate system with a spherical work volume.
The first axis of cylindrical coordinate robots, Figure 1.2.6, is a revolute
base rotation. The second and third are prismatic, resulting in a natural
cylindrical motion. Commercial models of Spherical and Cylindrical robots
were originally very common and popular in machine tending and material
handling applications. Hundreds are still in use but now there are only a
few commercially available models. The decline in use of these two
configurations is attributed to problems arising from use of the prismatic
link for radial extension/retraction motion; a solid boom requires clearance
to fully retract.




Figure 1.2.5: Hydraulic powered spherical robot (courtesy Kohol Systems, Inc.).


Parallel-Link Manipulators. For some special purpose applications, parallel-
link robots are more suitable than serial link robots. These robots generally
have three or six links in parallel, each link attached to a fixed base and to a
moving working platform. See Figure 1.2.7. With proper design, a six-link
parallel-link manipulator can have six degrees of freedom motion of the
working platform. The military Link trainer is a large parallellink robot
moving a pilot’s seat. These robots have greater stiffness and precision than
serial-link robots, where the positioning errors of each link are compounded
as one moves outwards from the base. Thus, lightweight parallel-link robots




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
1.2 Commercial Robot Configurations and Types                                       9

are able to precisely move large loads. These robots have been used for
example in machining and surface finishing of precision industrial and
aerospace components such as bulkheads and air vehicle outer skins.




Figure 1.2.6: Cylindrical arm using scissor mechanism for radial prismatic motion
(courtesy of Yamaha Robotics).


   The parallel-link robot is a closed-kinematic-chain system, and as such is
relatively difficult to analyze [Liu and Lewis 1993]. The control system design
problem is more difficult for these robots.

Drive Types of Commercial Robots
The vast majority of commercial industrial robots use electric servo-motor
drives with speed reducing transmissions. Both AC and DC motors are
popular. Some servo-hydraulic articulated arm robots are available now for
painting applications. It is rare to find robots with servo-pneumatic drive
axes. All types of mechanical transmissions are used, but the tendency is
toward low- and zero-backlash type drives. Some robots use direct drive
methods to eliminate the amplification of inertia and mechanical backlash
associated with other drives. Joint angle position sensors, required for real-
time servo-level control, are generally considered an important part of the
drive train. Less often, velocity feedback sensors are provided.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10                                                    Commercial Robot Manipulators




                 Figure 1.2.7: Parallel-link robot (courtesy of ABB Robotics).




1.3 Commercial Robot Controllers

Commercial robot controllers are specialized multiprocessor computing
systems that provide four basic processes allowing integration of the robot
into an automation system: Motion Trajectory Generation and Following,
Motion/Process Integration and Sequencing, Human User integration, and
Information Integration.

Motion Trajectory Generation and Following. There are two important
controller-related aspects of industrial robot motion generation. One is the
extent of manipulation that can be programmed, the other is the ability to
execute controlled programmed motion. A unique aspect of each robot system
is its real-time servo-level motion control. The details of real-time control
are typically not revealed to the user due to safety and proprietary information
secrecy reasons. Each robot controller, through its operating system programs,
converts digital data from higher-level coordinators into coordinated arm
motion through precise computation and high-speed distribution and
communication of the individual axis motion commands which are executed
by individual joint servo-controllers. Most commercial robot controllers
operate at a sample period of 16 msec. The real-time motion controller
invariably uses classical independent-joint proportional-integral-derivative
(PID) control or simple modifications of PID. This makes commercially
available controllers suitable for point-to-point motion, but most are not
suitable for following continuous position/velocity profiles or exerting
prescribed forces without considerable programming effort, if at all.
    Recently, more advanced controllers have appeared. The Adept Windows
family of automation controllers (http://www.adept.com) integrates
robotics, motion control, machine vision, force sensing, and manufacturing




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
1.3 Commercial Robot Controllers                                             11

logic in a single control platform compatible with Windows 98 & Windows
NT/2000. Adept motion controllers can be configured to control other
robots and custom mechanisms, and are standard on a variety of systems
from OEMs.

Motion/Process Integration and Sequencing. Motion/process integration
involves coordinating manipulator motion with process sensors or other
process controller devices. The most primitive process integration is through
discrete digital input/output (I/O). For example a machine controller external
to the robot controller might send a one bit signal indicating that it is ready
to be loaded by the robot. The robot controller must have the ability to read
the digital signal and to perform logical operations (if then, wait until, do
until, etc.) using the signal. That is, some robot controllers have some
programmable logic controller (PLC) functions built in. Coordination with
sensors (e.g. vision) is also often provided.

Human Integration. The controller’s human interfaces are critical to the
expeditious setup and programming of robot systems. Most robot controllers
have two types of human interface available: computer style CRT/keyboard
terminals for writing and editing program code off-line, and teach pendants,
which are portable manual input terminals used to command motion in a
telerobotic fashion via touch keys or joy sticks. Teach pendants are usually
the most efficient means available for positioning the robot, and a memory
in the controller makes it possible to play back the taught positions to execute
motion trajectories. With practice, human operators can quickly teach a series
of points which are chained together in playback mode. Most robot
applications currently depend on the integration of human expertise during
the programming phase for the successful planning and coordination of robot
motion. These interface mechanisms are effective in unobstructed workspaces
where no changes occur between programming and execution. They do not
allow human interface during execution or adaptation to changing
environments.
    More recent advanced robot interface techniques are based on behavior-
based programming, where various specific behaviors are programmed into
the robot controller at a low level (e.g. pick up piece, insert in machine
chuck). The behaviors are then sequenced and their specific motion
parameters specified by a higher-level machine supervisor as prescribed by
the human operator. Such an approach was used in [Mireles and Lewis
2001].

Information Integration. Information integration is becoming more
important as the trend toward increasing flexibility and agility impacts
robotics. Many commercial robot controllers now support information
integration functions by employing integrated PC interfaces through the


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
12                                           Commercial Robot Manipulators

communications ports (e.g. RS-232), or in some through direct connections
to the robot controller data bus. Recent integration efforts are making it
possible to interface robotic workcells to the internet to allow remote site
monitoring and control. There are many techniques for this, the most
convenient of which is Lab VIEW 6.1, which doe not require programming
in Java.


1.4 Sensors

Much of the information in this section was prepared by Kok-Meng Lee
[Lewis 1998]. Sensors and actuators [Tzou and Fukuda 1992] function as
transducers, devices through which high-level workcell Planning,
Coordination, and Control systems interface with the hardware components
that make up the workcell. Sensors are a vital element as they convert states
of physical devices into signals appropriate for input to the workcell PC&C
control system; inappropriate sensors can introduce errors that make proper
operation impossible no matter how sophisticated or expensive the PC&C
system, while innovative selection of sensors can make the control and co-
ordination problem much easier.
   Sensors are of many different types and have many distinct uses. Having
in mind an analogy with biological systems, proprioceptors are sensors
internal to a device that yield information about the internal state of that
device (e.g. robot arm joint-angle sensors). Exteroceptors yield information
about other hardware external to a device. Sensors yield outputs that are
either analog or digital; digital sensors often provide information about the
status of a machine or resource (gripper open or closed, machine loaded, job
complete). Sensors produce outputs that are required at all levels of the PC&C
hierarchy, including uses for:

•     servo-level feedback control (usually analog proprioceptors)
•     process monitoring and coordination (often digital exteroceptors or part
      inspection sensors such as vision)
•     failure and safety monitoring (often digital—e.g. contact sensor,
      pneumatic pressure-loss sensor)
•     quality control inspection (often vision or scanning laser).

Sensor output data must often be processed to convert it into a form
meaningful for PC&C purposes. The sensor plus required signal processing
is shown as a Virtual Sensor. It functions as a data abstraction—a set of data
plus operations on that data (e.g. camera, plus framegrabber, plus signal
processing algorithms such as image enhancement, edge detection,




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
1.4 Sensors                                                                  13

segmentation, etc.). Some sensors, including the proprioceptors needed for
servo-level feedback control, are integral parts of their host devices, and so
processing of sensor data and use of the data occurs within that device; then,
the sensor data is incorporated at the servocontrol level or Machine
Coordination level. Other sensors, often vision systems, rival the robot
manipulator in sophistication and are coordinated by a Job Coordinator,
which treats them as valuable shared resources whose use is assigned to jobs
that need them by some priority assignment (e.g. dispatching) scheme. An
interesting coordination problem is posed by so-called active sensing, where,
e.g., a robot may hold a scanning camera, and the camera effectively takes
charge of the motion coordination problem, directing the robot where to
move to effect the maximum reduction in entropy (increase in information)
with subsequent images.

Types of Sensors
This section summarizes sensors from an operational point of view. More
information on functional and physical principles can be found in [Fraden
1993], [Fu et al. 1987], [Snyder 1985].

Tactile Sensors. Tactile sensors rely on physical contact with external objects.
Digital sensors such as limit switches, microswitches, and vaccuum devices
give binary information on whether contact occurs or not. Sensors are
available to detect the onset of slippage. Analog sensors such as spring-loaded
rods give more information. Tactile sensors based on rubberlike carbon- or
silicon-based elastomers with embedded electrical or mechanical components
can provide very detailed information about part geometry, location, and
more. Elastomers can contain resistive or capacitive elements whose electrical
properties change as the elastomer conmpresses. Designs based on LSI
technology can produce tactile grid pads with, e.g., 64×64 ‘forcel’ points on
a single pad. Such sensors produce ‘tactile images’ that have properties akin
to digital images from a camera and require similar data processing.
Additional tactile sensors fall under the classification of ‘force sensors’
discussed subsequently.

Proximity and Distance Sensors. The noncontact proximity sensors include
devices based on the Hall effect or inductive devices based on the
electromagnetic effect that can detect ferrous materials within about 5 mm.
Such sensors are often digital, yielding binary information about whether or
not an object is near. Capacitance-based sensors detect any nearby solid or
liquid with ranges of about 5mm. Optical and ultrasound sensors have longer
ranges.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
14                                               Commercial Robot Manipulators

   Distance sensors include time-of-flight rangefinder devices such as sonar
and lasers. The commercially available Polaroid sonar offers accuracy of
about 1 in. up to 5 feet, with angular sector accuracy of about 15 deg. For
360 deg. coverage in navigation applications for mobile robots, both scanning
sonars and ring-mounted multiple sonars are available. Sonar is typically
noisy with spurious readings, and requires low-pass filtering and other data
processing aimed at reducing the false alarm rate. The more expensive laser
rangefinders are extremely accurate in distance and have very high angular
resolution.

Position, Velocity, and Acceleration Sensors. Linear position-measuring
devices include linear potentiometers and the sonar and laser rangefinders
just discussed. Linear velocity sensors may be laser- or sonar-based Doppler-
effect devices.




Figure 1.4.1: Optical Encoders, (a) Incremental optical encoder, (b) Absolute optical
encoder with n=4 using Grey code. (Snyder, W.E., 1985. Industrial Robots, Prentice-
Hall, NJ, with permission.)


   Joint-angle position and velocity proprioceptors are an important part of
the robot arm servocontrol drive axis. Angular position sensors include
potentiometers, which use dc voltage, and resolvers, which use ac voltage
and have accuracies of 15 min. Optical encoders can provide extreme accuracy
using digital techniques. Incremental optical encoders use three optical sensors
and a single ring of alternating opaque/clear areas, Figure 1.4.1(a), to provide
angular position relative to a reference point and angular velocity information;
commercial devices may have 1200 slots per turn. More expensive absolute
optical encoders, Figure 1.4.1(b), have n concentric rings of alternating
opaque/clear areas and require n optical sensors. They offer increased
accuracy and minimize errors associated with data reading and transmission,
particularly if they employ the Grey code, where only one bit changes between




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
1.4 Sensors                                                                15

two consecutive sectors. Accuracy is 3600/2n with commercial devices having
n=12 or so.
   Gyros have good accuracy if repeatability problems associated with drift
are compensated for. Directional gyros have accuracies of about 1.5 deg.
Vertical gyros have accuracies of 0.5 deg and are available to measure
multiaxis motion (e.g. pitch and roll). Rate gyros measure velocities directly
with thresholds of 0.05 deg/sec or so.
   Various sorts of accelerometers are available based on strain gauges (next
paragraph), gyros, or crystal properties. Commercial devices are available
to measure accelerations along three axes. A popular new technology involves
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), which are either surface or bulk
micromachined devices. MEMS accelerometers are very small, inexpensive,
robust, and accurate. MEMS sensors have especially been used in the
automotive industry [Eddy 1998].

Force and Torque Sensors. Various torque sensors are available, though they
are often not required; for instance, the internal torques at the joints of a
robot arm can be computed from the motor armature currents. Torque sensors
on a drilling tool, for instance, can indicate when tools are becoming dull.
Linear force can be measured using load cells or strain gauges. A strain gauge
is an elastic sensor whose resistance is a function of applied strain or
deformation. The piezoelectric effect, the generation of a voltage when a
force is applied, may also be used for force sensing. Other force sensing
techniques are based on vacuum diodes, quartz crystals (whose resonant
frequency changes with applied force), etc.
   Robot arm force-torque wrist sensors are extremely useful in dexterous
manipulation tasks. Commercially available devices can measure both force
and torque along three perpendicular axes, providing full information about
the Cartesian force vector F. Standard transformations allow computation
of forces and torques in other coordinates. Six-axis force-torque sensors are
quite expensive.

Photoelectric Sensors. A wide variety of photoelectric sensors are available,
some based on fibreoptic principles. These have speeds of response in the
neighborhood of 50 microsec with ranges up to about 45 mm, and are useful
for detecting parts and labeling, scanning optical bar codes, confirming part
passage in sorting tasks, etc.

Other Sensors. Various sensors are available for measuring pressure,
temperature, fluid flow, etc. These are useful in closed-loop servo-control
applications for some processes such as welding, and in job coordination
and/or safety interrupt routines in others.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
16                                               Commercial Robot Manipulators

Sensor Data Processing
Before any sensor can be used in a robotic workcell, it must be calibrated.
Depending on the sensor, this could involve significant effort in
experimentation, computation, and tuning after installation. Manufacturers
often provide calibration procedures though in some cases, including vision,
such procedures may not be obvious, requiring reference to the published
scientific literature. Time-consuming recalibration may be needed after any
modifications to the system.




Figure 1.4.2: Signal Processing using FSM for Optical Encoders (a) Phase relations in
incremental optical encoder output, (b) Finite state machine to decode encoder output
into angular position. (Snyder 1985).




Figure 1.4.3: Hardware design from FSM. (a) FSM for sonar transducer control on a
mobile robot, (b) Sonar driver control system from FSM.



   Particularly for more complex sensors such as optical encoders, significant
sensor signal conditioning and processing is required. This might include
amplification of signals, noise rejection, conversion of data from analog to
digital or from digital to analog, and so on. Hardware is usually provided
for such purposes by the manufacturer and should be considered as part of
the sensor package for robot workcell design. The sensor, along with its
signal processing hardware and software algorithms may be considered as a
data abstraction and is called the ‘virtual sensor’.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
1.4 Sensors                                                                   17

   If signal processing does need to be addressed, it is often very useful to use
finite state machine (FSM) design. A typical signal from an incremental optical
encoder is shown in Figure 1.4.2(a); a FSM for decoding this into the angular
position is given in Figure 1.4.2(b). FSM are very easy to convert directly to
hardware in terms of logical gates. A FSM for sequencing a sonar is given in
Figure 1.4.3(a); the sonar driver hardware derived from this FSM is shown
in Figure 1.4.3(b).
   A particular problem is obtaining angular velocity from angular position
measurements. All too often the position measurements are simply differenced
using a small sample period to compute velocity. This is guaranteed to lead
to problems if there is any noise in the signal. It is almost always necessary to
employ a low-pass-filtered derivative where velocity samples vk are computed
from position measurement samples pk using, e.g.,




where T is the sample period and ␣ is a small filtering coefficient. A similar
approach is needed to compute acceleration.

Vision Systems, Cameras, and Illumination. Typical commercially available
vision systems conform to the RS-170 standard of the 1950’s, so that frames
are acquired through a framegrabber board at a rate of 30 frames/sec. Images
are scanned; in a popular US standard, each complete scan or frame consists
of 525 lines of which 480 contain image information. This sample rate and
image resolutions of this order are adequate for most applications with the
exception of vision-based robot arm servoing. Robot vision system cameras
are usually TV cameras—either the solid-state charge-coupled device (CCD),
which is responsive to wavelengths of light from below 350nm (ultraviolet)
to 1100nm (near infrared) and has peak response at approximately 800nm,
or the charge injection device (CID), which offers a similar spectral response
and has a peak response at approximately 650nm. Both line-scan CCD
cameras, having resolutions ranging between 256 and 2048 elements, and
area-scan CCD cameras are available. Medium-resolution area-scan cameras
yield images of 256×256, though high-resolution devices of 1024×1024 are
by now available. Line-scan cameras are suitable for applications where parts
move past the camera, e.g., on conveyor belts. Framegrabbers often support
multiple cameras, with a common number being four, and may support black-
and-white or color images.
   If left to chance, illumination of the robotic workcell will probably result
in severe problems in operations. Common problems include low-contrast
images, specular reflections, shadows, and extraneuos details. Such prob-
lems can be corrected by overly sophisticated image processing, but all of


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
18                                            Commercial Robot Manipulators

this can be avoided by some proper attention to details at the work-cell design
stage. Illumination techniques include spectral filtering, selection of suitable
spectral characteristics of the illumination source, diffuse-lighting techniques,
backlighting (which produces easily processed silhouettes), structured-lighting
(which provides additional depth information and simplifies object detection
and interpretation), and directional lighting.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES

[Decelle 1988] Decelle, L.S., “Design of a Robotic Workstation For Compo-
      nent Insertions,” AT&T Technical Journal, March/April 1988, Volume
      67, Issue 2. pp 15–22.
[Eddy 1998] Eddy, D.S., and D.R.Sparks, “Application of MEMS technol-
    ogy in automotive sensors and actuators,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 86, no. 8,
    pp. 1747–1755, Aug. 1998.
[Fraden 1993] Fraden, J. AIP Handbook Of Modern Sensors, Physics, De-
    sign, and Applications, American Institute of Physics. 1993.
[Fu et al. 1987] Fu, K.S., R.C.Gonzalez, and C.S.G.Lee, Robotics, McGraw-
    Hill, New York, 1987.
[Jamshidi et al. 1992] Jamshidi, M., Lumia, R., Mullins, J., and Shahinpoor,
    M., 1992. Robotics and Manufacturing: Recent Trends in Re-search,
    Education, and Applications, Vol. 4, ASME Press, New York.
[Lewis and Fitzgerald 1997] Lewis, F.L., M.Fitzgerald, and K.Liu “Robotics,”
    in The Computer Science and Engineering Handbook, Allen B.Tucker,
    Jr. ed., Chapter 33, CRC Press, 1997.
[Lewis 1998] Lewis, F.L., “Robotics,” in Handbook of Mechanical Engi-
    neering, F.Kreith ed., chapter 14, CRC Press, 1998.
[Liu and Lewis 1993] Liu, K., F.L.Lewis, G.Lebret, and D.Taylor, “The
    singularities and dynamics of a Stewart Platform Manipulator,” J.
    Intelligent and Robotic Systems, vol. 8, pp. 287–308, 1993.
[Mireles and Lewis 2001] Mireles, J., and F.L.Lewis, “Intelligent Mate-rial
   Handling: Development and implementation of a matrix-based discrete-
   event controller,” IEEE Trans. Industrial Electronics, vol. 48, no. 6, pp.
   1087–1097, Dec. 2001.




                                                                          19
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
20                                                           REFERENCES

[NAM 1998] National Assoc. Manufacturers Report, “Technology on the
   Factory Floor III,” ed. P.M.Swadimass, NAM Pub. Center, 1–800–637–
   3005, Aug. 1998.
[Pugh 1983] Pugh, A., ed., 1983. Robotic Technology, IEE Control Engi-
    neering Series 23, Pergrinus, London.
[Snyder 1985] Snyder, W.E., 1985, Industrial Robots: Computer Interfac-
    ing and Control, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, USA.
[Tzou and Fukuda 1992] Tzou, H.S., and Fukuda, T., Precision Sensors,
    Actuators, and Systems, Kluwer Academic, 1992.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
