Chapter 10

Robot Control
Implementation and
Software
The diversity of robot manipulator research along with the complex
requirements of the associated hardware/software systems has always
presented a challenge for software developers. As a result, many of the
previously developed software control platforms were complex, expensive,
and not very user friendly. Even though several of the previous platforms
were designed to provide an open architecture-based system, very few of the
previous platforms have been reused. To address previous disadvantages,
this chapter describes the design and implementation of a software control
platform called the Robotic Platform. The Robotic Platform is an open
software development platform for robot manipulator applications. It
includes hardware interfacing, servo control, trajectory generation, 3D
simulation, a graphical user interface, and a math library. As opposed to
distributed solutions, the Robotic Platform implements all of these
components on a single hardware platform, with a single programming
language (C++), and on a single operating system while guaranteeing hard
real-time performance. This design leads to an open architecture that is less
complex, easier to use, and easier to extend, and hence, builds on the following
state-of-the-art technologies and general purpose components to further
increase simplicity and reliability: i) PC technology, ii) the QNX Real-Time
Operating System, iii) the Open Inventor and STL libraries, iv) object-oriented
design, and v) an easy-to-use, previously-developed, low-level control
environment.

                                                                            517
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
518                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software


10.1 Introduction

Since the construction of a software control platform requires building
blocks that cover a wide range of disciplines (see Figure 10.1.1), it would be
desirable to create a common generic platform that can be reused by
researchers for different applications. Considering the variety of robotic
applications and research areas, this task is made even more challenging due
to the fact that robot manipulator vendors often supply the user with
proprietary robot control languages that run on proprietary hardware
components. Due to the lack of flexibility and performance of proprietary
robot control languages, some of the previous work has focused on building
robot control libraries on top of a commonly used programming language
(RCCL [Lloyd et al. 1988] and ARCL [Corke] are examples of such
libraries). While many of the previous software approaches achieved new
levels of flexibility and performance by using a common programming
language, many software control platforms developed in the 80’s and early
90’s were inherently complex due to the limitations of the operating systems
and the hardware components of that time. That is, most operating systems
did not support real-time programming, and hence, fostered the
development of projects such as RCI [Lloyd 1990] and Chimera [Stewart
1989]. In addition, procedural programming languages, such as “C”, tend
to reach their limits with regard to reusability for complex projects. In
addition, the limited performance of hardware components of that era
forced system developers to utilize distributed architectures (see [Miller
1991], [Kapoor 1996], and [Pelich 1996]) that integrated a mix of
proprietary hardware and software. Besides the obvious advantages of
distributed systems (e.g., greater extensibility and more computational
power), there are several disadvantages. Specifically, a distributed
architecture increases the complexity of the software significantly.
Additionally, hard real-time behavior over network connections often
requires expensive proprietary hardware. Generally, the overall hardware
cost is also higher; furthermore, users have to familiarize themselves with
different hardware architectures and operating systems. Even though many
software control platforms have attempted to be flexible, reconfigurable,
and open, these platforms are seldom reused (compared to non-robotic
platforms like Open Inventor or Corba). Apparently, engineers consider it
faster and easier to develop their applications from scratch. Indeed, as many
researchers have noted, the learning curve of installing, learning, and
modifying previously developed software control platforms of the past is
extremely steep.
   Over the last ten years, many innovations in the computing area have
occurred. Specifically, the advent of object-oriented software design
[Stroustrup 1991] facilitated the management of more complex projects



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.1 Introduction                                                                519

while also fostering code reuse and flexibility. For example, robot control
libraries like RIPE [Miller 1991], MMROC+ [Zielinski 1997], OSCAR
[Kapoor 1996], and ZERO++ [Pelich 1996] utilized object-oriented
techniques in robot programming. The engineering community has also
witnessed the proliferation of real-time Unix-like operating systems for the
PC [QSSL], which facilitates the replacement of proprietary hardware
components for real-time control [Costescu 1999]. Likewise, in the
hardware sector, the engineering community has witnessed the advent of
high-speed, low-cost PCs, fast 3D graphics video boards, and inexpensive
motion control cards. Consequently, the PC platform now provides versatile
functionality, and hence, makes complex software architectures and
proprietary hardware components superfluous. As a result of these
technological advances, the QMotor Robotic Toolkit (QMotor RTK)
[Loffler 2001] was developed. The QMotor RTK was one of the first
software control platforms to integrate real-time manipulator control and
the graphical user interface (GUI) all on a single PC. Despite, the many
advantages of the QMotor RTK, it lacked some capabilities due to the
limitations of the real-time operating system (i.e., QNX4) on which it was
based. For example, it lacked a 3D simulation capability, and it did not
support the use of threads.




         Figure 10.1.1: Building Blocks of a Robotic Software Control Platform


    In the late 1990’s, QSSL, one of the leading real-time software development
houses, substantially upgraded QNX4 with the release of QNX6 [QSSL]
(i.e., QNX6/Neutrino operating system). This microkernel-based operating
system is probably the most advanced real-time operating system currently
available; furthermore, it has additional components for software
development and multimedia applications. Indeed, the new attributes of
QNX6 greatly facilitated the potential capabilities of an upgrade of the
QMotor RTK, in fact so much so, QMotor RTK was completely transformed
into a new software control platform call the Robotic Platform [Bhargava


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
520                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software

2001]. The rest of this chapter provides a broad overview of the Robotic
Platform by examining its advantages, its design, and its operation. The word
“broad” needs to be emphasized because it is really impossible to give a
detailed explanation of how a software control platform should be developed
for robot manipulators in one chapter of a book. With that being said, it is
hope that this chapter will give the reader a better understanding of the
associated complexities.


10.2 Tools and Technologies

Given recent technological advances, it now seems almost obvious that new
software control platforms should integrate servo control loops, trajectory
generation, task level programs, GUI programs, and 3D simulation in a
homogeneous software architecture. That is, next-generation software
control platforms should utilize one hardware platform (e.g., the PC), only
one operating system (e.g., the QNX6 Real-Time Operating System
[QSSL]), and only one programming language (e.g., C++ [Stroustrup
1998]). The advantages of this next-generation software control platform
are as follows:

Simplicity. A homogeneous non-distributed architecture is much smaller and
   simpler than a distributed inhomogeneous architecture. It is easier to
   install, easier to understand, and easier to extend. Simplicity is critical
   with regard to motivating code reuse of the platform for different
   applications.

Performance. The homogeneous, non-distributed architecture also ensures
   high performance and hard real-time behavior, since overhead due to
   interprocess communication is minimal.

Flexibility at all Levels. Every component of the platform is open for
   extensions and modifications. Many past platforms have utilized an open
   architecture at some levels, but other levels had been implemented on
   proprietary hardware such that they could not be modified.

Cost. The Robotic Platform requires fewer hardware components than a
   distributed platform. Basically, a single PC with one or more input/output
   (I/O) boards is sufficient. Additionally, PC hardware is very cost effective
   as compared to other hardware platforms.

To explain the advantages in more detail and delineate how the Robotic
Platform reduces software development and complexity, the general purpose
tools and technologies that are used to develop the Robotic Platform are


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.2 Tools and Technologies                                              521

now examined. It seems logical to begin this discussion with the hardware
engine, namely the standard desktop PC. Due to its popularity in the consumer
market, the standard desktop PC has evolved dramatically over the past 20
years. While in the past, only expensive UNIX workstations provided the
processing power necessary to control robotic systems, the PC has caught
up or even exceeded the performance of workstations [Costescu 1999].
Compared to UNIX workstations, a PC based system allows for a greater
variety of hardware and software components. Additionally, these
components and the PC itself are usually cheaper than their UNIX
counterparts; furthermore, the PC is a well-known platform that is
comfortable for most software developers.
   The second most important part of any software control platform is the
operating systems. Indeed since reliability is extremely important for robot
manipulation, the QNX6 Real-Time Operating Systems by QSSL [QSSL]
was selected. The programming interface of QNX6 is compliant with the
POSIX standards and is the first platform that combines the following
features:

Hard Real-Time. QNX6 provides hard real-time response (e.g., it can execute
  a control loop at a certain frequency without falling behind). The real-
  time functionality is integrated in the microkernel.

Self-Hosted Development. The development and the execution of software
    are performed in the same environment and on the same PC.

Fast 3D Graphics. QNX6 provides support for hardware-accelerated 3D, as
   required for the graphical simulation of a robotic work cell.

Threads. QNX6 supports the concurrent execution of processes, known as
   threads.

Device Driver Architecture. It is very easy to develop device drivers under
  QNX6, as is required for integrating different robotic hardware.

Cost. QNX6 is also very cost-effective as it is free for non-commercial use
   and runs on low-cost standard PCs.

The third most important part or design aspect of any software control
platform is the programming philosophy. With regard to developing robot
manipulator control software, object-oriented programming has three
main benefits over procedural programming. First, it provides language
constructs that allow for a much easier programming interface. For
example, a matrix multiplication can be expressed by a simple “*”, similar
to MATLAB programming. Second, object-oriented programming allows


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
522                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software

for a system architecture that is very flexible but yet very simple. That is,
the components (classes) of a system can have a built-in default behavior
and default settings. The use of this default behavior and/or default settings
allows the programmer to reduce the code size. The programmer, however,
can still override the default behavior for specific applications. Finally,
object-oriented programming supports generic programming by facilitating
the development of components that are independent from a specific
implementation (e.g., a generic class “Manipulator” will work with
different manipulator types). All of the above benefits are based on the
general concepts of object-oriented programming, such as abstraction,
encapsulation, polymorphism, and inheritance [Stroustrup 1991]. As will
be shown later in this chapter, these object-oriented design concepts lead to
an intuitive system architecture. As one might expect, the language of
choice is C++, as it provides the whole spectrum of object-oriented
concepts while maintaining high performance [Stroustrup 1998] (e.g.,
templates and inline functions can be used to create highly versatile and
optimized code in the Robotic Platform). The power of C++ and object-
oriented programming can be further increased when using strong object-
oriented libraries such as STL [Musser 1996]. STL provides standard data
structures (e.g., lists, vectors, etc.) and algorithms. These standard data
structures and algorithms simplify programming effort since these tools are
often required in common programming tasks. The data structures of the
STL are very universal since they can be used with different data types (i.e.,
template programming).
   The last design aspect of a software control platform has do with how the
roboticist interacts with the system. Specifically, how does the roboticist
animate objects for simulation purposes and how does the roboticist
implement and tune control algorithms. For purposes of simulation
animation, Open Inventor [Wernecke] was utilized. Open Inventor,
developed by Silicon Graphics, is an object-oriented C++ library for creating
3D graphics and animation. Open Inventor minimizes development effort,
as it is able to load 3D models that were created in the Virtual Reality
Modeling Language (VRML) format [Hartman 1996]. A variety of software
packages are available that facilitate the construction of 3D VRML models.
These packages can be utilized to quickly create a graphical representation
of robotic components. The Robotic Platform utilizes the built-in
functionality of Open Inventor to animate these components. Open
Inventor also provides advanced features like object picking, which is very
useful in the programming of operator interfaces. For purposes of control
implementation, QMotor [Loffler 2002] was utilized because it allows users
to establish a real-time control loop, to log data, to tune control parameters,
and to plot signals. QMotor control programs can be directly integrated in
the class design of the Robotic Platform since QMotor supports object-
oriented programming.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.3 Design of the Robotic Platform                                        523


10.3 Design of the Robotic Platform

Overview
Each component of the Robotic Platform (e.g., the teachpendant, the
trajectory generator, etc.) is modeled by a C++ class. A C++ class definition
combines the data and the functions related to that component. For example,
the class “Puma560” contains the data related to the Puma 560 robot (e.g.,
the current joint position) as well as functions related to the Puma 560 robot
(e.g., enabling of the arm power). Hence, the design of the Robotic Platform
results from grouping data and functions in a number of classes in a
meaningful and intuitive way. A class can also use parts of the functionality
and the data of another class (called the base class) by deriving this class
from the base class. The classes of the Robotic Platform include GUI
components and a 3D model for graphical simulation. These types of
components are traditionally found in separate programs (e.g., see the RCCL
robot simulator [Lloyd et al. 1988]). However, by including them in the
same class, one can achieve tight integration of the user interface, 3D
modeling, and other functional parts.
   To provide new capabilities for different applications, the user creates
new classes. Usually, new classes are derived from one of the already
existing classes to minimize coding effort. This process is called
inheritance, and it greatly facilitates code reuse and eliminates redundancy.
To illustrate how classes are derived from each other, class hierarchy
diagrams are used. The main class hierarchy diagram of the Robotic
Platform is shown in Figure 10.3.1. Each arrow is drawn from the derived
class to the parent class. The further to the right a class is listed, the more
specific it must become. The further to the left a class is listed, the more
generic it must become. The classes of the Robotic Platform can be
separated into the following categories (note that some of the classes
discussed below are not shown in Figure 10.3.1 since their class hierarchies
will be discussed later):

The Core Classes. The classes RoboticObject, FunctionalObject, and
  PhysicalObject build the core of the Robotic Platform by defining the
  overall behavior of all robotic objects. These classes by themselves can
  be the basis for any robotic system.

Generic Robotic Classes. Derived from the core classes are a number of
  generic robotic classes. These classes (e.g., ServoControl, Manipulator,
  and Gripper) cannot be instantiated. Rather, these classes serve as base
  classes that implement common functionality while also presenting a
  generic interface to the programmer (i.e., these classes can be used to


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
524                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software




                    Figure 10.3.1: Class Hierarchy of the Robotic Platform.


     create programs that are independent from the specific hardware or the
     specific algorithm).

Specific Robotic Classes. Derived from the generic robotic classes are classes
   that implement a specific piece of hardware (e.g., the class Puma560
   implements the Puma 560 robot) or a specific functional component (e.g.,
   the class DefaultPositionControl implements a proportional integral
   derivative (PID) position controller).

The ControlProgram Class. This class is the basis for all real-time control
   loops.

Utility Classes. The utility classes manage common tasks (e.g., managing
   configuration files).

The Object Manager. The object manager supervises all objects and classes
   existing in the system.

The Math Library. The math library consists of classes for using matrices,
   vectors, transformations, filters, differentiators, and integrators.



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.3 Design of the Robotic Platform                                            525

The Manipulator Model Library. The manipulator model library consists
   of classes that model the kinematic and dynamic behavior of
   manipulators.




               Figure 10.3.2: Run-Time Architecture of the Robotic Platform.




                 Figure 10.3.3: Object Relationships in an Example Scenario.


   In a robot control program, the user instantiates objects from classes.
When instantiating an object, memory for the object is reserved, and the
object initializes itself. The user can create as many objects as desired from
the same class. For example, two Puma robots can be operated by simply
creating two objects of the class Puma560. As soon as objects are created,
the user can employ their functionality. The object manager maintains a list
of all currently existing objects. With the object manager, it is possible to
initiate functionality on multiple objects (e.g., shutdown all objects). The
Scene Viewer is the default GUI of the Robotic Platform. It contains windows


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
526                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software

to view the 3D scene of the robotic work cell and to list all objects. The
overall run-time architecture is shown in Figure 10.3.2.
   In a robotic system, different components are related to each other. To
reflect this fact, object relationships are established between objects. For
example, objects can specify their physical connection to each other. Object
relationships are implemented by C++ pointers to the related object. The
object relationships in an example scenario are shown in Figure 10.3.3.

Core Classes
The class RoboticObject is the base class for all classes. It defines a generic
interface (i.e., a set of functions that can be used with all classes of the Robotic
Platform). For example, a program can use the startShutdown( ) function to
instruct an object of either the class Puma560 or the class Gripper to
shutdown. Specifically, the following generic functionality is defined in the
class RoboticObject (see also Figure 10.3.4):

Error Handling. Every object must indicate its error status.

Interactive Commands. Each object can define a set of interactive commands
    (e.g., “Open Gripper”) that will show up in the object pop-up menu of
    the Scene Viewer.

Configuration Management. Each object can use the global configuration
  file to set itself up. Additionally, each object can also have a local object
  configuration file.

Shutdown Behavior. Each object is able to shutdown itself.

GUI Control Panel. Each object is able to create a control panel.

Message Handler. Each object has a message handler that can interpret custom
  messages.

Thread Management. Each object indicates if additional threads are required
   for its operation and also provides functions that execute those additional
   threads.

Note that the actual functionality is usually implemented in the derived class.
However, the class RoboticObject also implements simple default
functionality. This feature supports code reuse and simplicity by giving all
classes derived from the class RoboticObject the ability to take over this
default functionality if necessary. Table 10.3.1 shows all functions and their
default behavior.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.3 Design of the Robotic Platform                                           527




                               Figure 10.3.4: The Class Robotic Object.


    The class PhysicalObject is derived from the class RoboticObject. It is the
base class for all classes that represent physical objects (e.g., manipulators,
sensors, grippers, etc.). It defines a generic interface for these classes as
illustrated in Figure 10.3.5 and Table 10.3.2. Specifically, the following generic
functionality is defined in PhysicalObject:

3D Visualization. Every physical object can create its Open Inventor 3D
  model. The Scene Viewer loops through all physical objects to create the
  entire 3D scene.

Object Connections. A physical object can specify another object as a
  mounting location. By using this object relationship, the Scene Viewer
  draws objects at the right location (e.g., the gripper being mounted on
  the end-effector of the manipulator).

Position and Orientation. The position/orientation information specifies the
   absolute location of the object in the scene (or the mounting location, if
   an object connection is specified).

Simulation Mode. Every physical object can be locked into simulation mode.
   That is, the object does not perform any hardware I/O (i.e., its behavior
   is only simulated).

The class FunctionalObject does not contain any functionality; however, it is
use to build other classes. For example, functional classes, such as the class
TrajectoryGenerator, are derived from the class FunctionalObject.

Robot Control Classes
The central components of any robotic work cell are manipulators. The
class Manipulator is a generic class that defines common functionality of


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
528                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software




Table 10.3.1: The Interface of the Class RoboticObject and its Default
Behavior.


manipulators with any number of joints. Derived from the class Manipulator
is the class DefaultManipulator, which contains the defaultimplementation
of a manipulator. The class DefaultManipulator is a template class (i.e., it
is parameterized with the number of joints). The generic programming




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.3 Design of the Robotic Platform                                         529




                                Figure 10.3.5: The Class Physical Object.




Table 10.3.2: The Interface of the Class PhysicalObject and its Default
Behavior.


interface and the default implementation are illustrated in Table 10.3.3.
Derived from the class DefaultManipulator are the classes that implement
specific manipulator types. Currently, three manipulators are supported:
the Puma 560 robot, the IMI robot [Berkeley 1992], and the Barrett Whole
Arm Manipulator (WAM) [Barrett] in both the 4 link and 7 link
configuration. More information about the specific control
implementation of these robot manipulators can be found in [Loffler 2001]
and [Costescu et al. 1999]. For simulation of the manipulators, their
dynamic model is required. Additionally, for Cartesian control, forward/
inverse kinematics and the calculation of the Jacobian matrix are needed.
All of these functions are located in the ManipulatorModel classes. The


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
530                                        Robot Control Implementation and Software

class hierarchy and the generic interface of the ManipulatorModel classes
are displayed in Figure 10.3.6.




Table 10.3.3: Functionality defined in the Classes Manipulator and Default-
Manipulator.




                           Figure 10.3.6: The ManipulatorModel Classes.


  The class DefaultManipulator creates a real-time control loop, but it does
not include the servo control algorithm. The servo control algorithm is
contained in a separate object of the class ServoControl or of a derived class.
The class ServoControl is a generic class that defines common properties
and functionality of a ServoControl. That is, a servo control obtains the


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.3 Design of the Robotic Platform                                            531

current position from the manipulator object and calculates the required
output control signal to achieve the control task (e.g., servo the manipulator
to a desired setpoint). Derived from the class ServoControl is the class
DefaultPositionControl, which contains a PID position control with friction
compensation in joint and Cartesian space. The control loop in the class
DefaultManipulator first determines the current position of the manipulator
and then calls the calculate() function of the class ServoControl. The
advantage of the servo control being a separate object is that the user can
switch between multiple servo control algorithms, even while the
manipulator is moving.
   The trajectory generation is also performed in a separate class. The
class TrajectoryGenerator defines the interface of a generic trajectory
generator. A trajectory generator is any object that creates a continuous
stream of setpoints and forwards this stream to a servo control object. A
trajectory generator must implement its own loop such that the trajectory
generator can run independently and at a different frequency than the
frequency used in the servo control. The servo control calls the
getCurrentSetpoint () function of the trajectory generator to determine the
current desired position. It is also possible to define multiple trajectory
generators and switch between them while the manipulator is moving.
The class QueueTrajectoryGenerator is derived from the class
TrajectoryGenerator to implement the generic interface and common
functionality of a trajectory generator that creates the trajectory along via
points and target points (i.e., motion queue management functions are
implemented). Derived from the class QueueTrajectoryGenerator is the
class DefaultTrajectoryGenerator. This class is the specific implementation
of a trajectory generator that can interpolate both in joint space and
Cartesian space, including path blending between two motion segments at
the via points. Table 10.3.4 shows the interface of the default trajectory
generator.




Figure 10.3.7: Object Setup for the Servo Control and the Trajectory Generation of a
Manipulator.


   Classes, such as Puma560 or WAM, automatically create a default
trajectory generator and a default servo control for the convenience of the
user. However, the user can switch to a different trajectory generator or
servo control if desired. Figure 10.3.7 illustrates in a typical scenario how



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
532                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software




               Table 10.3.4: Interface of the class DefaultTrajectoryGenerator.


the manipulator object, the servo control object, and the trajectory generator
object work together.

External Device Classes
Besides the classes related to specific manipulators, there are a several other
classes that can be used for robotic applications. Specifically, these classes
give the robot manipulator the ability to interface with other physical objects
by means of grippers, robotic hands, and/or tools. These external device
classes are given below:

Gripper. The class Gripper is the generic interface for a gripper. Basically, it
   defines the functions open(), close(), and relax().

DefaultGripper. The class DefaultGripper assumes that two digital output
   lines control the gripper, one digital line to open the gripper, and one to
   close it.

BarrettHand. This is a class to operate the BarrettHand [Barrett]. This class
   allows the user to move each of the three fingers to certain positions and
   also control the spread motion.

ForceTorqueSensor. This class defines the generic interface for a force/
   torque sensor. That is, it defines functions to read the forces and the
   torques.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.3 Design of the Robotic Platform                                           533

AtiFTSensor. This class is the specific implementation of the ATI Industrial
   Automation Gamma 30/100 Force/Torque sensor.

ToolChanger. The class ToolChanger is the generic interface of a tool changer.
   Basically, it defines the functions lock(), unlock(), and relax().

DefaultToolChanger. The class Def aultToolChanger assumes that one digital
   output line controls the lock function of the toolchanger and another
   line the unlock function.

StaticObject. An object of the class StaticObject has no functionality other
   than specifying its 3D model. It can be used to add objects such as a table
   or work pieces to the 3D scene.

Utility Classes
As with any complex software system, utility programs are needed for
communication purposes and for providing the user with system related
information. To this end, several separate, general-purpose utility classes
are used throughout the Robotic Platform. These utility classes are given
below:

Status. The class Status provides functionality to stack status messages. It
   returns detailed status reports to the user. Each class has a data member
   of class Status that indicates the status of the object.

Client. The class Client simplifies the sending of messages to a separate task
   or thread.

Server. The class Server, the counterpart to the class Client, simplifies receiving
   of messages and replying to messages.

Config. The class Conf ig handles configuration files in ASCII format.

IOBoardClient. The class IOBoardClient allows communication with an I/
  O board (e.g., providing encoders readings, writing D/A values, reading
  A/D values, setting and reading digital inputs/outputs).

Lock. The class Lock provides mutual exclusion between two threads.

Configuration Management
The Robotic Platform utilizes a global configuration file, which is parsed by
the object manager and the objects to determine the system’s configuration.
This file is called rp.cfg by default. The object manager searches for this file


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
534                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software

in the path specified by the shell variable RP_CONFIG_PATH. By starting a
Robotic Platform program with the option -config <filename>, a different
filename and path for the configuration file can be specified. The format of
the configuration file is now discussed. For each object, the configuration
file lists the object name in brackets, the class name of the object, and some
additional settings (see Figure 10.3.8). Table 10.3.5 lists possible object
settings and their related member functions defined by the classes
RoboticObject and PhysicalObject. Derived classes can be used to define
additional settings.




Figure 10.3–8: An Example Global Configuration File.


Object Manager
The object manager, implemented as the class ObjectManager, handles all
objects in the system. Every time a new object is created, it registers itself
with the object manager. Similarly, every time an object is destroyed, it is
removed from the object list that is maintained by the object manager. The
object manager contains the necessary functionality to loop through this
list, and hence, allows one to perform operations on multiple objects. For
example, the Scene Viewer retrieves a list of all objects that are derived
from the class PhysicalObject. This list retrieval operation allows the Scene
Viewer to render each of the objects, and thereby, render the entire 3D
scene.

The object manager also maintains a list of all the classes used in the Robotic
Platform. This feature is essential for fostering generic programming. The
advantages of generic programming for this application are obvious.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.3 Design of the Robotic Platform                                          535

Specifically, generic code utilizes only components that provide a generic
interface; hence, generic code does not need to be changed when a component
with a different implementation is used. That is, the same code can be used
for a number of specific implementations, and hence, attributes to code reuse
(e.g., a generic trajectory generator can be used with different manipulator
types). Fortunately, C++ utilizes class inheritance and virtual functions to
facilitate generic programming. To illustrate this concept, consider a section
of the class hierarchy as shown in Figure 10.3.9. The following snippet of
generic code demonstrates how to write a manipulator independent program
that works with either the Puma robot, the WAM, the IMI, or any robot that
might be added in the future:

                Manipulator *manipulator;
                ObjectManager om;

                manipulator = om.createDerivedObject<Manipulator>(“leader”);
                // Creates either a Puma, an IMI or a WAM object, depending on
                // what is specified in the global configuration file under
                the name “leader”

                // Now, we can do generic operations
                manipulator->enableArmPower();
                Transform t = manipulator->getCurrentCartesianPosition();}

   To utilize generic programming in C++, the above code creates an object
of the derived class (e.g., an object of the class Puma or the class WAM),
and operates the object via a pointer to the generic base class (i.e.,
Manipulator *manipulator). The function createDerivedObject() of the
object manager is utilized to create an object of either the class Puma560,
Barrett Arm, WAM or IMI. To create the correct object, the
createDerivedObject() function looks for the object name in the global
configuration file (see Figure 10.3.8). Then, the createDerivedObject()
function reads the class name of the object from the configuration file and
creates an object of this class. Hence, to switch to a different manipulator
type, only the class name in the global configuration file has to be changed
when utilizing an existing generic program.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
536                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software




                     Table 10.3.5: Object Settings of the Configuration File.




         Figure 10.3.9: The Generic Class Manipulator and its Derived Classes.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.3 Design of the Robotic Platform                                         537

Concurrency/Communication Model
An inherent complication associated with the development of a software
control platform for robot manipulator systems is the issue of concurrency.
That is, while it is often sufficient for many engineering systems to run as a
single task, robotic systems require components, such as the servo control,
to be executed concurrently with other components (e.g., the trajectory
generator). The Robotic Platform addresses this issue by running all
concurrent tasks on the same PC. It should be noted that since QNX6 supports
symmetric multiprocessing, it is possible to distribute the tasks over multiple
processors.




                    Figure 10.3.10: Creating New Threads for Concurrency.

    The predecessor of the Robotic Platform, the QMotor RTK [Loffler 2001],
executed multiple programs to achieve concurrency on a single processor.
While this concept fosters modularity, it is inconvenient to manage the startup
and termination of multiple programs. In contrast, an application that uses
the Robotic Platform is compiled and linked to a single program instead.
This program spawns threads if concurrent execution is required. Once the
program terminates; all threads terminate automatically. Figure 10.3.10
illustrates an example of how a user program spawns multiple threads. At
program start, only thread 1 is executing. At the initialization of the Robotic
Platform library, a new thread is created that executes the 3D Scene Viewer.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
538                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software

Then, the user utilizes a new object of a manipulator class. The creation of
this manipulator object automatically spawns a third thread for the servo
control loop. Hence, the first thread can go ahead and calculate target points
for the manipulator, while the servo control loop and the Scene Viewer run
in the background. To ensure real-time behavior of time critical tasks, the
threads run at different priorities (e.g., the servo control loop runs at the
high priority 27).
   Since threads access the same address space, communication between
threads can easily be performed by using this address space. However, it is
important to synchronize this access to avoid corruption of the data structures.
Synchronization is achieved by using the class Lock to provide mutual
exclusion for accessing the data that is shared between multiple threads.

Plotting and Control Tuning Capabilities
The issue of tuning and debugging the low-level controller and trajectory
planning algorithms has usually not addressed in many of the previously
developed software control platforms. However, this is an extremely
important issue given the level of complexity associated with accurately
positioning a multi-degree of freedom system such as robot manipulator. To
address this issue, the Robotic Platform utilizes QMotor for low-level
algorithm development. QMotor [Loffler 2002] is a comprehensive
environment for implementing and tuning control strategies. QMotor consists
of: i) a client/server architecture for hardware access, ii) a C++ library to
create control programs, and iii) custom GUI for control parameter tuning,
data logging, and plotting.




                   Figure 10.3.11: The QMotor Control Parameter Window.


   To communicate with hardware, QMotor uses hardware servers that run
in the background and perform hardware I/O at a fixed rate. Servers for
different I/O boards are available (e.g., the ServoToGo board, the Quanser
MultiQ board, and the ATI force/torque sensor interface board). The use of
hardware servers provides an abstract client/server communication


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.3 Design of the Robotic Platform                                      539




                              Figure 10.3.12: The QMotor Plot Window.


interface such that clients can perform the same generic operations with
different servers. Hence, one can quickly reconfigure the system to use
different I/O boards by simply starting different servers. For writing control
programs, QMotor provides a library, which defines the class
ControlProgram. To implement a real-time control loop, the user derives a
specific class from the class ControlProgram and defines several functions
that perform the control calculation and the necessary housekeeping. Once
a control program is implemented and compiled, the user can start up the
QMotor GUI, load the control program, start it, and tune the control
strategy from the control parameter window (see Figure 10.3.11).
Furthermore, the user can open multiple plot windows (see Figure 10.3.12)
and set the logging parameters.
   To utilize QMotor for the Robotic Platform, classes such as the class Def
aultManipulator are derived from the class ControlProgram. Hence, these
classes inherit the functionality of a control program (i.e., real-time
execution, data logging, and communication with the GUI). If a class is
derived from the class ControlProgram, the base class RoboticObject
automatically creates a new thread of execution that runs the control loop in
the background. QMotor was originally designed to load and tune one
control program at a time. That is, to switch to a different control program,
the current control program had to be stopped and unloaded. The Robotic
Platform is designed to start and run multiple control loops at the same time;
hence, it became necessary to upgrade QMotor. Specifically, QMotor can
now attach itself to an executing control program instead of loading and
starting the control program. This QMotor modification now allows the


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
540                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software

following operational scenario in the Robotic Platform. The user first starts
the control program. This control program creates several threads that
execute real-time control loops. The user can then start the QMotor GUI
and attach it to any of the control programs. Once the QMotor GUI is
attached to a control program, control parameters can be changed and data
can be plotted.

Math Library
Past robot control libraries often introduced their own specific robotic data
types. Most of these data types are based on vectors or matrices (e.g., a
homogeneous transformation is a 4x4 matrix). Hence, it is more feasible to
use a general C++ matrix library and define robotic types on top of it. Most
of the matrix libraries available for C++ use dynamic memory allocation,
which risks the loss of deterministic real-time response [Loffler 2001]. Hence,
the big disadvantage of libraries that use dynamic memory allocation is that
they can not be used in large sections of the Robotic Platform. To overcome
this problem, special real-time matrix classes were developed for the Robotic
Platform that use templates for the matrix size. This means that the matrix
size is known at compile time and dynamic memory allocation is not required.
Besides being feasible for real-time applications, this solution also produces
highly optimized code. That is, due to the use of templates and inline functions,
the matrix classes can be as fast as direct programming. Specifically, with
optimized implementation, the multiplication of two 2x2 matrices C=A * B
is as fast as writing

                c11=a11 * b11 + a12 * b21;
                c12=a11 * b12 + a12 * b22; etc.

   An additional advantage is that the compiler can check for the correct
matrix sizes at compile time (e.g., a matrix multiplication of two matrices
with incompatible size is detected during compilation). Figure 10.3.13,
Table 10.3.6, and Table 10.3.7. Functions of the Matrix, Vector, and
Transformation Classes illustrates the class hierarchy, the types classes, and
the data types. The classes MatrixBase, VectorBase, Matrix, Column
Vector, and RowVector are parameterized with the data type of the
elements. The default element data type is double, which is the standard
floating-point data type of the Robotic Platform. The classes MatrixBase
and VectorBase are pure virtual base classes that allow for manipulation of
matrices and vectors of an unknown size (matrices and vectors of an
unknown size are required during generic manipulator programming).
Figure 10.4.1 shows an example program that uses the math library to
calculate a position equation.



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.3 Design of the Robotic Platform                                                541




                     Figure 10.3.13: Class Hierarchy of the Matrix Classes.




                              Table 10.3.6: Classes of the Math Library.




      Table 10.3.7: Functions of the Matrix, Vector, and Transformation Classes.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
542                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software




                   Figure 10.3.14: Example Program for the Matrix classes.


   In addition to the matrix, vector, and transformation classes, the classes
ButterworthFilter, Differentiator and Integrator are part of the math library.
The class ButterworthFilter is used for low-pass filtering. The class
Differentiator implements numerical differentiation via the backwards
difference method plus low-pass filtering. Finally, the class Integrator utilizes
the trapezoidal method for numerical integration. The user can derive a
specific class from the class Integrator to implement more advanced
integration methods. Both classes are parameterized with the data type (i.e.,
they work with scalars, vectors, and matrices).

Error Management and the Front-End GUI
Each object is responsible for maintaining the appropriate error status. If a
fatal error occurs, any object can request the object manager to shut down
the system. For example, this could be the case when a control torque exceeds
its limit. For such a system shutdown, the object manager loops through all
objects in the system and calls their start Shut down () function. Then, the
object manager waits until all objects have completed their shutdown. The
completion of the object shutdown is indicated by the is ShutdownComplete()
function.
    The front-end GUI components for the Robotic Platform were developed
with the C++ GUI class library QWidgets++. QWidgets++ allows for object-
oriented techniques in GUI programs. The GUI consists of three parts:

•     The Scene Viewer is the default supervising GUI, which is opened
      automatically at startup of every Robotic Platform program.

•     Each class can have its own control panel. The control panels are opened
      from the Scene Viewer.

•     Several utility programs (e.g., the Manual Move program and the
      Teachpendant program) have a GUI.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.4 Operation of the Robotic Platform                                       543

Operation of the front-end GUI for the Robotic Platform is further explained
in the next section.


10.4 Operation of the Robotic Platform

Scene Viewer and Control Panels
When a program running inside the Robotic Platform is executed, the Scene
Viewer window opens up. The Scene Viewer window displays the entire 3D
scene and also allows the user to open a window that displays a list of
currently running objects (see Figure 10.4.2). To create a 3D scene, the Scene
Viewer loops through all objects that are derived from the class
PhysicalObject and calls the get3DModel() function to obtain the Open
Inventor 3D data of that object. Then, the Scene Viewer uses the object
connection relationships (specified by the function setConnection() of the
class PhysicalObject) to display the 3D objects at the right position (e.g., to
display a gripper being mounted at the end-effector of a robot manipulator).
Furthermore, the Scene Viewer continuously updates the 3D scene with the
current state of all objects (e.g., it uses the current joint position of a robot
manipulator to display the robot joints in the correct position). Hence, the
3D scene rendered in the Scene Viewer window always represents the
current state of the actual hardware (in simulation mode, the simulated state
of the hardware is represented). To select the best viewing position, the user
navigates in the 3D scene using a mouse. The user can rotate the view, move
forward and backward, and also store/restore desired viewing positions.
Additionally, the user can hide objects in the scene to increase the frame rate.
Many different Scene Viewer windows can be opened to view the 3D scene
from different viewing positions at the same time. The user can also open the
Object Viewer window to display the list of all objects that are currently
being instantiated.
   Each object also has an individual pop-up menu (See Figure 10.4.3. The
Object Pop-Up Menu). This pop-menu appears if the user either: i) right
clicks on the object in the Scene Viewer rendering area, or ii) right clicks
on an entry in the Object Viewer window. Options associated with pop-up
menu can be used to hide the object in the rendering area and to select
between a wire frame or a solid display. In addition, the pop-up menu
displays interactive commands that are defined in the specific class of the
object. For example, a gripper object has additional menu items to open,
close, and relax the gripper. Finally, the user can open the control panel
from the object pop-up menu. Figure 10.4.5 shows the control panel of the
Barrett WAM as an example. Each control panel appears in a new
window.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
544                                         Robot Control Implementation and Software




                  Figure 10.4.1: The Scene Viewer and Object List Windows.




                               Figure 10.4.2: The Object Pop-Up Menu.




                      Figure 10.4.3: The Control Panel of the WAM Class.


Utility Programs for Moving the Robot To facilitate low-level
algorithm development, utility programs for moving the robot must be
created. For example, the Manual Move utility (see Figure 10.4.6) is a



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.4 Operation of the Robotic Platform                                    545

program that gives the user the ability to test the low-level servo control of
a robot manipulator. Specifically, the Manual Move utility contains a
slider for each joint. As, the user can move the sliders with the mouse, the
selected robot manipulator joint immediately follows the commanded user
input.




                               Figure 10.4.4: The Manual Move Utility.




                                     Figure 10.4.5: The Teachpendant.


   The Teachpendant (see Figure 10.5.1) implements a low-level zero gravity
controller that allows the user to physically position the robot manipulator
joints in any location. Once the user has moved the robot manipulator joints
to a desired target position, this position can be stored as in list of robot
manipulator positions. The Teachpendant utilizes the Robotic Platform’s
trajectory generator to move the robot manipulator to the stored positions.
In this way, the user can cycle the robot manipulator through all or some of
the stored positions.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
546                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software

Writing, Compiling, Linking, and Starting Control Programs
A control program is first compiled and then linked to the Robotic Platform
library. The entire Robotic Platform (i.e., all classes and the Scene Viewer) is
contained in one library. As explained earlier, the Robotic Platform can easily
be extended by adding new classes. If the extension is specific to a certain
control program, the classes can be added to the code of the associated control
program. If an extension is used in different control programs, it would
probably be more convenient to add this new functionality to the Robotic
Platform library. To reflect the extensions in preexisting compiled and linked
programs, the Robotic Platform library is constructed to be a dynamic library
(i.e., a program loads the library whenever it is started). Therefore, after the
library is extended with new functionality, programs such as the Teachpendant
will take advantage of the new functionality (e.g., the teachpendant will be
able to operate new manipulator types).
    Figure 10.4.6 shows the listing of an example control program for a simple
pick and place operation. Every Robotic Platform control program must
first call RoboticPlatform::init(). This function initializes the Robotic Platform
and starts up the Scene Viewer. The command line arguments are passed to
RoboticPlatform:: init () such that any Robotic Platform program can be
started with certain default command line options (see Table 10.4.1).
Additionally, these options can be controlled from C++ code as well by using
the functions listed in the third column of Table 10.4.1. After
RoboticPlatform::init() is called, the user’s program creates all objects that
are required for the associated robotic task (i.e., a gripper object, a Puma
560 object, and a trajectory generator object are created). If the option -wait
was specified in the command line, no control loops are started until the
user’s program executes the RoboticPlatf orm:: start () function. This function
waits for the user to hit the start button. This feature is necessary since this
function gives the user the ability to start the QMotor GUI, set control
parameters, and select logging modes before the control loops are started.
The last part of the example program utilizes the trajectory generator object
and the gripper object to move the robot to the workpiece, close the gripper,
pick up the workpiece, and drop it at the target position.

                // Simple pick and place operation
                #include “RoboticPlatform.hpp”

                void main(int argc, char *argv[])
                {
                  RoboticPlatform::init(argc, argv);

                    Puma560 puma;                // Create Puma560 object
                    DefaultGripper gripper;     // Create gripper object

                    DefaultTrajectoryGenerator tragen;

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.4 Operation of the Robotic Platform                                     547




Table 10.4.1: Default Command Line Options of Robotic Platform Programs.




Figure 10.4–6: A Simple Pick and Place Program




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
548                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software


10.5 Programming Examples
Comparison of Simulation and Implementation
A very interesting option is to forward the setpoints created by a trajectory
generator to two manipulators. In this way, the motion of two manipulators
with the same kinematics can be compared, or the behavior of a real
manipulator can be compared with a dynamic simulation. The latter
application is implemented in the program in Figure 10.5.1. First, two objects
of the class Puma 560 are created, and one of the objects is configured into
simulation mode. Then, both objects are connected to the same trajectory
generator to receive the same setpoints.




    Figure 10.5–1: Example to Forward the Same Trajectory to two Robots.

Virtual Walls
This is a good example on how to create a custom servo control. It also
demonstrates the use of the manipulator model functions and the math library.
Virtual walls are virtual planes in the manipulator’s workspace that generate
a reaction force once the manipulator is moved into the wall. Given a plane
with the plane equation (using homogeneous coordinates):



   where n is the normal vector of the plane, and d0 is the distance from the
origin. If xEndEf fector is the current end-effector position, then


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
10.5 Programming Examples                                                     549




Using the control law




   creates a joint torque that resists moving the robot into the wall.
   To implement a new servo control algorithm, a class is derived from the
class ServoControl (See line (1) of Figure 10.5.2). The above virtual wall
functions are implemented in the function calculate(), which calculates the
control output. In the function main(), the robot object is created as usual.
In addition, an object of the virtual wall servo control class is created (See
line (2) of Figure 10.5.2). Finally, the robot object is instructed to utilize the
new servo control instead of the default position control, and the gravity
compensation is enabled to allow the robot to be pushed around (See line (3)
of Figure 10.5.2).




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
550                                       Robot Control Implementation and Software




Figure 10.5–2: Virtual Walls Example.


10.6 Summary

The Robotic Platform is a software framework to support the implementation
of a wide range of robotic applications. As opposed to past distributed
architecture-based software control platforms, the Robotic Platform presents
a homogeneous, non-distributed object-oriented architecture. That is, based
on PC technology and the real-time operating system QNX6, all non real-
time and real-time components are integrated in a single C++ library. The
architecture of the Robotic Platform provides efficient integration and
extensibility of devices, control strategies, trajectory generation, and GUI
components. In addition, software-based control systems implemented with
the Robotic Platform are inexpensive and offer high performance. The
Robotic Platform is also built on the QMotor control environment for data
logging, control parameter tuning, and real-time plotting. A real-time math
library simplifies operations and provides an easy-to-use programming
interface. Built-in GUI components like the Scene Viewer and the control
panels provide for easy operation of the Robotic Platform and a quick ramp-
up-time for users that are inexperienced in C++ programming.



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES

[Lloyd et al. 1988] J. Lloyd, M.Parker and R.McClain, “Extending the RCCL
    Programming Environment to Multiple Robots and Processors”, Proc.
    IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation, 1988, pp. 465–
    469.

[Corke] P.Corke and R.Kirkham, “The ARCL Robot Programming System”,
    Proc. of the International Conference on Robots for Competitive Industries,
    Brisbane, Australia, pp. 484–493.

[Lloyd 1990] J.Lloyd, M.Parker and G.Holder, “Real Time Control Under
    UNIX for RCCL”, Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on
    Robotics and Manufacturing (ISRAM ‘90).

[Stewart 1989] D.B.Stewart, D.E.Schmitz, and P.K.Khosla, “CHIMERA II: A
    Real-Time UNIX-Compatible Multiprocessor Operating System for Sensor-
    based Control Applications”, Technical Report CMU-RI-TR-89–24,
    Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, September, 1989.

[Stroustrup 1991] B.Stroustrup, “What is ‘Object-Oriented Programming’?”,
     Proc. 1st European Software Festival. February, 1991.

[Miller 1991] D.J.Miller and R.C.Lennox, “An Object-Oriented Environment
    for Robot System Architectures”, IEEE Control Systems Magazine, Feb.
    1991, pp. 14–23.

[Zielinski 1997] C.Zielinski, “Object-Oriented Robot Programming”,
    Robotica, Vol.15, 1997, pp. 41–48.

[Kapoor 1996] Chetan Kapoor, “A Reusable Operational Software Architecture
    for Advanced Robotics”, Ph.D. thesis, University of Texas at Austin,
    December 1996.


                                                                           551
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
552                                                           REFERENCES

[Pelich 1996] C.Pelich & F.M.Wahl, “A Programming Environment for a
     Multiprocessor-Net Based Robot Control Unit”, Pr oc. 10th
     International Conference on High Performance Computing, Ottawa,
     Canada, 1996.

[QSSL] QSSL, Corporate Headquarters, 175 Terence Matthews Crescent,
   Kanata, Ontario K2M 1W8 Canada, Tel: +1 800–676–0566 or +1 613–
   591–0931, Fax: +1 613–591–3579, Email:info@qnx.com, http://qnx.com.

[Costescu 1999] N.Costescu, D.M.Dawson, and M.Loffler, “QMotor 2.0—A
    PC Based Real-Time Multitasking Graphical Control Environment”, IEEE
    Control Systems Magazine, Vol. 19 Number 3, Jun., 1999, pp. 68–76.

[Loffler 2001] M.Loffler, D.Dawson, E.Zergeroglu, and N.Costescu, “Object-
    Oriented Techniques in Robot Manipulator Control Software
    Development”, Proc. of the American Control Conference, Arlington, VA,
    June 2001, pp. 4520–4525.

[Bhargava 2001] M.Loffler, A.Bhargava, V.Chitrakaran, and D.Dawson,
    “Design and Implementation of the Robotic Platform”, Proc. of the IEEE
    Conference on Control Applications, Mexico City, Mexico, Sept., 2001, pp.
    357–362.

[Stroustrup 1998] B.Stroustrup, “An Overview of the C++ Programming
    Language”, Handbook of Object Technology, CRC Press. 1998. ISBN 0–
    8493–3135–8.

[Musser 1996] D.R.Musser, A.Saini, “STL Tutorial and Reference Guide”,
   Addison-Wesley, 1996. ISBN 0–201–63398–1.

[Wernecke] Josie Wernecke, “The Inventor Mentor”, Addison-Wesley, ISBN 0–
   201–62495–8.

[Hartman 1996] Hartman, Jed and Josie Wernecke, “The VRML 2.0
   Handbook”, Addison-Wesley, Reading Massachusetts, 1996.

[Loffler 2002] M.Loffler, N.Costescu, and D.Dawson, “QMotor 3.0 and the
    QMotor Robotic Toolkit—An Advanced PC-Based Real-Time Control
    Platform”, IEEE Control Systems Magazine, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp. 12–26,
    June, 2002

[Berkeley 1992] “Direct Drive Manipulator Research and Development
    Package, Operations Manual”, Integrated Motion Inc., Berkeley, CA,
    1992.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES                                                              553

[Barrett] Barrett Technologies, 139 Main St, Kendall Square, Cambridge, MA
    02142, http://www.barretttechnology.com/robot.

[Costescu et al. 1999] N.Costescu, M.Loffler, E.Zergeroglu, and D.M. Dawson,
    “QRobot—A Multitasking PC Based Robot Control System”,
    Microcomputer Applications Journal Special Issue on Robotics, Vol. 18,
    No. 1, pp.13–22, 1999.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
