Chapter 8

Neural Network Control
of Robots
A framework is given for controller design using neural networks. These
structures possess a universal approximation property that allows them to be
used in feedback control of unknown systems without requirements for linearity
in the system parameters or finding a regression matrix. Feedback control
topologies and weight tuning algorithms are given here that guarantee closed-
loop stability and bounded weights.


8.1        Introduction

In recent years, there has been a great deal of effort to design feedback control
systems that mimic the functions of living biological systems [White and
Sofge 1992], [Miller et al. 1991]. There has been great interest recently in
‘universal model-free controllers’ that do not need a mathematical model of
the controlled plant, but mimic the functions of biological processes to learn
about the systems they are controlling on-line, so that performance improves
automatically. Techniques include fuzzy logic control, which mimics linguistic
and reasoning functions, and artificial neural networks, which are based on
biological neuronal structures of interconnected nodes. Neural networks (NNs)
have achieved great success in classification, pattern recognition, and other
open-loop applications in digital signal processing and elsewhere. Rigorous
analyses have shown how to select NN topologies and weights, for instance,
to discriminate between specified exemplar patterns. By now, the theory and
applications of NN in open-loop applications are well understood, so that

                                                                             431
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
432                                        Neural Network Control of Robots

NN have become an important tool in the repertoire of the signal processor
and computer scientist.
   There is a large literature on NN for feedback control of unknown plants.
Until the 1990’s, design and analysis techniques were ad hoc, with no repeatable
design algorithms or proofs of stability and guaranteed performance. In spite
of this, simulation results appearing in the literature showed good performance.
Most of the early approaches used standard backpropagation weight tuning
[Werbos 1992] since rigorous derivations of tuning algorithms suitable for
closed-loop control purposes were not available. Many NN design techniques
mimicked adaptive control approaches, where rigorous analysis results were
available [Åström and Wittenmark 1989], [Landau 1979], [Goodwin et al.
1984], proposing NN feedback control topologies such as indirect
identification-based control, inverse dynamics control, series-parallel
techniques, etc.
   In keeping with the philosophy of those working in control system theory
since Maxwell, Lyapunov, A.N.Whitehead, von Bertalanffy, and others, to
address such issues it is necessary to begin with the knowledge available
about the system being controlled. Narendra [Narendra 1991], [Narendra
and Parthasarathy 1991] and others [Miller et al. 1991], [White and Sofge
1992], [Werbos 1992] pioneered rigorous NN controls applications by
studying the dynamical behavior of NN in closed-loop systems, including
computation of the gradients needed for backprop tuning. Other groups
providing rigorous analysis and design techniques for closed-loop NN
controllers included [Sanner and Slotine 1991] who showed how to use radial
basis function NN in feedback control, [Chen and Khalil 1992], [Chen and
Liu 1994] who provided NN tuning algorithms based on dead-zone methods,
[Polycarpou and Ioannou 1991], [Polycarpou 1996] who used projection
methods, [Lewis et al. 1993], [Lewis et al. 1995] who used an e-mod approach,
[Sadegh 1993] who provided NN controllers for discrete-time systems, and
[Rovithakis and Christodoulou 1994] who used dynamic NN for feedback
control.
   In this chapter is given an approach to the design and analysis of neural
network controllers based on several PhD dissertations and a body of published
work, including [Lewis et al. 1999], [Kim and Lewis 1998]. The control
structures discussed here are multiloop controllers with NN in some of the
loops and an outer tracking unity-gain PD loop. There are repeatable design
algorithms and guarantees of system performance including both small tracking
errors and bounded NN weights. It is shown that as uncertainty about the
controlled system increases or performance requirements increase, the NN
controllers require more and more structure. An exposition of this material in
greater depth appears in [Lewis 1999], which also shows relationships with
Fuzzy Logic Systems.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
8.2 Background in Neural Networks                                             433


8.2 Background in Neural Networks

In this section is provided the background in neural network structures required
for feedback control. For more details see [Haykin 1994], [Lewis et al. 1999],
[Lewis and Kim 1998]. Two key features that make NN useful for feedback
control are their universal approximation property and their learning
capability, which arises due to the fact that their weights are tunable parameters
that can be updated to improve controller performance. The universal
approximation property is the main feature that makes non-linear network
structures more suitable for robot control than adaptive robot controllers,
which have generally relied upon the determination of a regression matrix,
which in turn requires linearity in the tunable parameters (LIP).

Multilayer Neural Networks
A multilayer neural network is shown in Figure 8.2.1. This NN has two
layers of adjustable weights, and is called here a ‘two-layer’ net. This NN
has no internal feedback connections and so is termed feedforward, and no
internal dynamics and so is said to be static. The NN output y is a vector with
m components that are determined in terms of the n components of the input
vector x by the recall equation


                                                                          (8.2.1)


where (·) are the activation functions and L is the number of hidden-layer
neurons. The first-layer interconnections weights are denoted vjk and the second-
layer interconnection weights by wij. The threshold offsets are denoted by vj,
wi.
   Many different activation functions (·) are in common use. For feed-back
control using multilayer NN it is required that (·) be smooth enough so that
at least its first derivative exists. Suitable choices include the sigmoid


                                                                          (8.2.2)


the hyperbolic tangent


                                                                          (8.2.3)


and other logistic-curve-type functions, as well as the gaussian and an assortment
of other functions.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
434                                                Neural Network Control of Robots




                      Figure 8.2.1: Two-layer feedforward neural network.



   By collecting all the NN weights vjk, wij into matrices of weights VT, WT,
the NN recall equation may be written in terms of vectors as

                                                                            (8.2.4)

The thresholds are included as the first columns of the weight matrices WT,
VT; to accommodate this, the vectors x and  (·) need to be augmented by
placing a ‘1’ as their first element (e.g. x=[1 x1 x2…xn]T). In this equation, to
represent (8.2.1) one has sufficient generality if  (·) is taken as a diagonal
function from ᑬL to ᑬL that is  (z)=diag{ (zj)} for a vector z=[z1 z2 …zL]T ∈ ᑬL.
   Note that the recall equation is nonlinear in the first-layer weights and
thresholds V.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
8.2 Background in Neural Networks                                             435

Universal Function Approximation Property. NN satisfy many important
properties. A main one of concern for feedback control purposes is the universal
function approximation property [Hornik and Stinchombe 1989]. Let f(x) be
a general smooth function from ᑬn to ᑬm. Then, it can be shown that, as long
as x is restricted to a compact set S of ᑬn, there exist weights and thresholds
such that one has


                                                                          (8.2.5)


for some number of hidden-layer neurons L. This holds for a large class of
activation functions, including those just mentioned. The value  is called the
NN functional approximation error, and it generally decreases as the net size
L increases. In fact, for any choice of a positive number , one can find a
feedforward NN such that


                                                                          (8.2.6)


for all x in S. The selection of the net size L for a prescribed accuracy  is an
open question for general unstructured fully-connected NN. This problem
can be solved for CMAC, FL nets, and other structured nonlinear nets as
subsequently described.
   The ideal NN weights in matrices W, V that are needed to best approximate
a given nonlinear function f(x) are difficult to determine. In fact, they may not
even be unique. However, all one needs to know for controls purposes is that,
for a specified value of  some ideal approximating NN weights exist. Then,
an estimate of f(x) can be given by


                                                                          (8.2.7)


where W, V are estimates of the ideal NN weights that are provided by some
on-line weight tuning algorithms subsequently to be detailed. Note that all
‘hat’ quantities are known, since they may be computed using measurable
signals and current NN weight estimates.
   The assumption that there exist ideal weights such that the approximation
property holds is very much like various similar assumptions in adaptive
control [Åström and Wittenmark 1989], [Landau 1979], including Erzberger’s
assumptions and linearity in the parameters. The very important difference is
that in the NN case, the universal approximation property always holds,
while in adaptive control such assumptions often do not hold in practice, and
so they imply restrictions on the form of the systems that can be controlled.
Overcoming the NLIP Problem. Multilayer NN are nonlinear in the weights


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
436                                       Neural Network Control of Robots

V and so weight tuning algorithms that yield guaranteed stability and bounded
weights in closed-loop feedback systems have been difficult to discover until a
few years ago. The NLIP problem is easily overcome if a correct and rigorous
approach is taken. One approach is the following appropriate use of the
Taylor series [Lewis et al. 1996].
   Define the functional estimation error

                                                                        (8.2.8)

the weight estimation errors

                                                                        (8.2.9)

and the hidden-layer output error

                                                                      (8.2.10)

    For any z one may write the Taylor series

                                                                      (8.2.11)

where ’ is the jacobian and the last term means terms of order z2.Therefore,

                                                                      (8.2.12)

This key equation allows one to write the functional estimation error as




                                                                      (8.2.13)

The first term has W multiplied by a known quantity (in square braces), and
the second term has V multipled by a known quantity. When used subsequently
in the closed-loop error dynamics, this form allows one to derive tuning laws
for V and W that guarantee closed-loop stability.



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
8.2 Background in Neural Networks                                            437

Linear-in-the-parameter neural nets
If the first-layer weights and thresholds V in (8.2.4) are fixed and only the
second-layer weights and thresholds W are tuned, then the NN has only one
layer of tunable weights. One may then define the fixed function
so that such a 1-layer NN has the recall equation

                                                                        (8.2.14)

where                                       and L is the number of hidden-layer
neurons. This NN is linear in the tunable parameters W, so that it is far easier
to tune. In fact, standard adaptive control proofs can be used to derive suitable
tuning algorithms.
   Though LIP, these NN still offer an enormous advantage over standard
adaptive control approaches that require the determination of a regression
matrix since they satisfy a universal approximation property if the functions
(.) are correctly chosen. Note that adaptive controllers are linear in the
system parameters, while 1-layer NN are linear in the NN weights. An
advantage of 1-layer NN over 2-layer NN is that firm results exist for the
former on the selection of the number of hidden layer neurons L for a specified
approximation accuracy. A disadvantage of LIP networks is that Barron [Barron
1993] has shown a lower bound on the approximation accuracy.

Functional-Link Basis Neural Networks. More generality is gained if (·) is
not diagonal, but (.) is allowed to be a general function from ᑬn to ᑬL. This
is called a functional-link neural net (FLNN) [Sadegh 1993]. For LIP NN, the
functional approximation property does not generally hold. However, a 1-
layer NN can still approximate functions as long as the activation functions
(.) are selected as a basis, which must satisfy the following two requirements
on a compact simply-connected set of S of ᑬn:

1. A constant function on S can be expressed as (8.2.14) for a finite number
   L of hidden-layer neurons.
2. The functional range of (8.2.14) is dense in the space of continuous functions
   from S to ᑬm for countable L.

If (.) provides a basis, then a smooth function f(x) from ᑬn to ᑬm can be
approximated on a compact set S of ᑬn, by

                                                                        (8.2.15)

for some ideal weights and thresholds W and some number of hidden layer
neurons L. In fact, for any choice of a positive number , one can find a
feedforward NN such that            for all x in S.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
438                                          Neural Network Control of Robots

    The approximation for f(x) is given by


                                                                      (8.2.16)


where W are the NN weight and threshold estimates given by the tuning
algorithm. For LIP NN, the functional estimation error is given by




                                                                      (8.2.17)

which, when used subsequently in the error dynamics, directly yields tuning
algorithms for W that guarantee closed-loop stability.
   Barron [Barron 1993] has shown that for all LIP approximators there is a
fundamental lower bound, so that  is bounded below by terms on the order of
1/L2/n. Thus, as the number of NN inputs n increases, increasing L to improve
the approximation accuracy becomes less effective. As shown subsequently,
this is not a major limitation on adaptive controllers designed using 1-layer
NN. This lower bound problem does not occur in the NLIP multilayer nonlinear
nets.
   A special FLNN is now discussed. We often use (·) in place of (.), with
the understanding that, for LIP nets, this activation function vector is not
diagonal, but is a general function from ᑬL to ᑬL.

Gaussian or Radial Basis Function (RBF) Networks. The selection of a basis
set of activation functions is considerably simplified in various sorts of
structured nonlinear networks, including radial basis function, CMAC, and
fuzzy logic nets. It will be shown here that the key to the design of such
structured nonlinear nets lies in a more general set of NN thresholds than
allowed in the standard equation (8.2.1), and in their appropriate selection.
   A NN activation function often used is the gaussian or radial basis function
(RBF) [Sanner and Slotine 1991] given when x is a scalar as


                                                                      (8.2.18)


where x is the mean and p the variance. RBF NN can be written as (8.2.4),
but have an advantage over the usual sigmoid NN in that the n-dimensional
gaussian function is well understood from probability theory, Kalman filtering,
and elsewhere, so that n-dimensional RBF are easy to conceptualize.
  The j-th activation function can be written as



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
8.2 Background in Neural Networks                                               439

                                                                          (8.2.19)

with              . Define the vector of activation functions as (x)⬅[1(x)
2(x)…L(x)]T. If the covariance matrix is diagonal so that Pj=diag{pjk}, then
(8.2.19) becomes separable and may be decomposed into components as


                                                                          (8.2.20)




       Figure 8.2.2:2-dimensional separable gaussian functions for an RBF NN.


where            are the k-th components of           . Thus, the n-dimensional
activation functions are the product of n scalar functions. Note that this equation
is of the form of the activation functions in (8.2.1), but with more general
thresholds, as a threshold is required for each different component of x at
each hidden layer neuron j; that is, the threshold at each hidden-layer neuron
in Figure 8.2.1 is a vector. The RBF variances pjk and offsets xjk are usually
selected in designing the RBF NN and left fixed; only the output-layer weights
W T are generally tuned. Therefore, the RBF NN is a special sort of FLNN
(8.2.14) (where (x)=(x)).



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
440                                         Neural Network Control of Robots

    Figure 8.2.2 shows separable gaussians for the case x 僆ᑬ 2. In this figure,
all the variances pjk are identical, and the mean values xjk are chosen in a
special way that spaces the activation functions at the node points of a 2-D
grid. To form an RBF NN that approximates functions over the region {-
1<x11, -1<x21} one has here selected L=5×5=25 hidden-layer neurons,
corresponding to 5 cells along x1 and 5 along x2. Nine of these neurons have
2-D gaussian activation functions, while those along the boundary require the
illustrated ‘one-sided’ activation functions.


8.3        Tracking Control Using Static Neural
           Networks
In this section is discussed feedback tracking control design using nonlinear
nets and assuming full state-variable feedback. For more details see [Lewis et
al. 1999] and other listed references. If full state feedback is available, then a
static feedforward NN suffices for control. A control topology and net tuning
algorithms are provided here that guarantee closed-loop stability and bounded
weights. The techniques to be discussed apply for general nonlinear nets
including both neural networks and fuzzy logic systems [Wang 1997], [Lewis
et al. 1997], so that the abbreviation NN might henceforth be construed as
meaning ‘nonlinear network’. The resulting multiloop control topology has
an outer PD tracking loop and an inner NN feedback linearization or action
generating loop. It is found that backprop tuning does not generally suffice,
but modified tuning algorithms are needed for guaranteed closed-loop
performance.
    Many industrial mechanical systems, as well as automobiles, aircraft, and
spacecraft, have dynamics in the Lagrangian form, which are exemplified by
the class of rigid robot systems. Therefore, the Lagrangian robot dynamics
will be considered [Lewis et al. 1993], [Lewis et al. 1996]. The NN control
techniques presented may also be applied to other unknown systems including
certain important classes of nonlinear systems [Lewis et al. 1999].


Robot Arm Dynamics and Error System
The dynamics of rigid Lagrangian systems, including robot arms, have some
important physical, structural, and passivity properties [Craig 1988], [Lewis
et al. 1993], [Slotine 1988], [Spong and Vidyasagar 1989] that make it very
natural to use NN in their control. These properties should be taken into
account in the design of any controller—in fact, they provide the foundation
for rigorous design algorithms for NN controllers.
   The dynamics of an n-link rigid (i.e. no flexible links or high-frequency



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
8.3 Tracking Control Using Static Neural Networks                             441

joint/motor dynamics) robot manipulator may be expressed in the Lagrange
form

                                                                           (8.3.1)

with q(t)僆ᑬn the joint variable vector, whose entries are the robot arm joint
angles or link extensions. M(q) is the inertia matrix, Vm(q,q) the coriolis/
centripetal matrix, G(q) the gravity vector, and F(q) the friction. Bounded
unknown disturbances (including e.g. unstructured unmodelled dynamics) are
denoted by d , and the control input torque is  (t) The robot dynamics have
the following standard properties:

Property 1: M(q) is a positive definite symmetric matrix bounded by
m1I<M(q)<m2I, with m1, m2 positive constants.

Property 2: The norm of the matrix Vm(q, q) is bounded by vb(q)||q||, for some
function vb(q).

Property 3: The matrix M–2Vm is skew-symmetric. This is equivalent to the
fact that the internal forces do no work.

Property 4: The unknown disturbance satisfies                  with bD a positive
constant.

Given a desired arm trajectory qd(t)僆ᑬn the tracking error is

                                                                           (8.3.2)

and the filtered tracking error is

                                                                           (8.3.3)

where is a symmetric positive definite design parameter matrix, usually
selected diagonal. If a controller is found such that r(t) is bounded, then e(t) is
also bounded; in fact                                            , with
the minimum singular value of .
   Differentiating r(t) and using (8.3.1), the arm dynamics may be written in
terms of the filtered tracking error as

                                                                           (8.3.4)

where the nonlinear robot function is

                                                                           (8.3.5)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
442                                        Neural Network Control of Robots

    The vector x required to compute f(x) can be defined, for instance, as

                                                                       (8.3.6)

which can be measured. Function f(x) contains potentially unknown robot
parameters including pay load mass and complex forms of friction.
   A suitable control input for trajectory following is given by the computed-
torque-like control

                                                                       (8.3.7)

with                   a gain matrix, generally chosen diagonal, and f(x) an
estimate of the robot function f(x) that is provided by some means. The
robustifying signal v(t) is needed to compensate for unmodelled unstructured
disturbances. Using this control, the closed-loop error dynamics is

                                                                       (8.3.8)

   In computing the control signal, the estimate f can be provided by several
techniques, including adaptive control or neural or fuzzy networks. The
auxiliary control signal v(t) can be selected by several techniques, including
sliding-mode methods and others under the general aegis of robust control
methods.
   The desired trajectory is assumed bounded so that



                                                                       (8.3.9)


with qB a known scalar bound. It is easy to show that for each time t, x(t) is
bounded by

                                                                      (8.3.10)

for computable positive constants c0, c1, c2.

Adaptive Control
Standard adaptive control techniques in robotics [Craig 1988], [Slotine 1988],
[Spong and Vidyasagar 1989], [Lewis et al. 1993] use the assumption that the
nonlinear robot function is linear in the tunable parameters so that

                                                                      (8.3.11)



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
8.3 Tracking Control Using Static Neural Networks                             443

where p is a vector of unknown parameters and         (x) is a known regression
matrix. The control is selected as

                                                                         (8.3.12)

and tuning algorithms are determined for the parameter estimates P. This is
facilitated by the LIP assumption. If the approximation error  is non-zero,
then the tuning algorithm must be modified in order to guarantee bounded
parameter estimates. Various robustifying techniques may be used for this
including the  -mod [Ioannou and Kokotovic 1984], the e-modification
[Narendra and Annaswamy 1987], or the dead-zone techniques [Kreisselmeier
and Anderson 1986]. There are adaptive control techniques by now that do
not require LIP or the determination of a regression matrix [Colbaugh and
Seraji 1994]. It is interesting to compare the complexity of these to the NN
controllers to be discussed herein.


Neural Net Feedback Tracking Controller
A NN will be used in the control (t) in (8.3.7) to provide the estimate f for the
unknown robot function f(x). The NN approximation property assures us that
there always exists a NN that can accomplish this within a given accuracy
N . For 2-layer NLIP NN the approximation is

                                                                         (8.3.13)

while for 1-layer LIP NN it is

                                                                         (8.3.14)

with (.) selected as a basis.
   The structure of the NN controller appears in Figure 8.3.1, where e⬅
                           . The neural network that provides the estimate for
f(x) appears in an inner control loop, and there is an outer tracking loop
provided by the PD term Kvr. In control theory terminology, the inner loop is
a feedback linearization controller [Slotine and Li 1991], while in computer
science terms it is the action generating loop [Werbos 1992], [Miller et al.
1991], [White and Sofge 1992]. This multiloop intelligent control structure is
derived naturally from robot control notions, and is not ad hoc. As such, it is
immune to philosophical deliberations concerning suitable NN control
topologies including the common discussions on feed-forward vs. feedback,
direct vs. indirect, and so on. It is to be noted that the static feedforward NN
in this diagram is turned into a dynamic NN by closing a feedback loop
around it (c.f. [Narendra 1991]).



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
444                                         Neural Network Control of Robots




Figure 8.3.1: Neural net robot controller, showing nonlinear neural network loop
and outer tracking loop.



Advantage of NN over LIP Adaptive Control. Each robotic system has its
own regression matrix, so that a different (x) must be determined for each
system. This regression matrix is often complicated and determining it can be
time consuming. One notes that the regression matrix effectively provides a
basis for function approximation for a specific given system. On the other
hand, the universal approximation property of non-linear networks shows
that NN provide a basis for all sufficiently smooth systems. Therefore, NN
can be used to approximate smooth f(x) for all rigid robotic systems, effectively
allowing the design of a single tunable controller for a class of systems. No
regression matrix need be determined, for the same NN activation functions
suffice for the whole class of plants.



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
8.4 Tuning Algorithms for Linear-in-the-Parameters NN                         445

   Even the 1-layer NN, which is LIP, has this advantage. Note that the 1-layer
NN is linear not in the system parameters, but in the NN weights. Even the LIP
NN has a universal approximation property so that no regression matrix is
needed.

Initial Tracking Errors and Initial NN Weights. It is now required to determine
how to tune the NN weights to yield guaranteed closed-loop stability. Several
cases are considered for NN controller design in this section. All of them need
the following construction.
   Since the NN approximation property holds on a compact set, one must
define an allowable initial condition set as follows. Let the NN approximation
property hold for the function f(x) given in (8.3.5) with a given accuracy N in
(8.2.6) for all x inside the ball of radius bx>qB. Define the set of allowable
initial tracking errors as

                                                                         (8.3.15)

    Note that the approximation accuracy of the NN determines size of Sr. For
a larger NN (i.e. more hidden-layer units), N is small for a larger radius bx.
Thus, the allowed initial condition set Sr is larger. On the other hand, a more
active desired trajectory (e.g. containing higher frequency components) results
in a larger acceleration qd(t), which yields a larger bound qB, thereby decreasing
Sr. It is important to note the dependence of Sr on the PD design ratio —both
c0 and c2 depend on .
    A key feature of our the Initial Condition Requirement is its independence
of the NN initial weights. This is in stark contrast to other techniques in the
literature where the proofs of stability depend on selecting some initial
stabilizing NN weights, which is very difficult to do.


8.4        Tuning Algorithms for Linear-in-the-
           Parameters NN

Suppose now that a LIP FLNN is used to approximate the nonlinear robot
function (8.3.5) according to (8.2.15) with              on a compact set, the
ideal approximating weights W constant, and (x) selected as a basis. An
estimate of f(x) is given by (8.3.14). Then the control law (8.3.7) becomes

                                                                          (8.4.1)

and the closed-loop filtered error dynamics (8.3.8) are

                                                                          (8.4.2)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
446                                         Neural Network Control of Robots

The next theorem derives the tuning law for a NN controller that is augmented
by an e-mod term as in [Narendra and Annaswamy 1987].
   It must now be assumed that the ideal weights W are constant and bounded
so that

                                                                          (8.4.3)

with the bound WB known. In [Polycarpou 1996] it is shown how to use
standard adaptive robust techniques to avoid the assumption that the bound
WB is known.

THEOREM 8.4–1: (NN Weight Tuning Algorithm).
   Let the desired trajectory qd(t) be bounded by qB and the initial tracking
error r(0) be in Sr. Let the NN reconstruction error bound N and the disturbance
bound dB be constants. Assume the ideal NN target weights are bounded by
WB as in (8.4.3). Let the control input for the robot arm be given by (8.4–1)
with v(t)=0 and gain


                                                                              (1)


Let the weight tuning be

                                                                              (2)

with F=FT>0 and >0 a small design parameter. Then the filtered tracking
error r(t) and the NN weight estimates W(t) are UUB with practical bounds
given respectively by the right-hand sides of (8), (9). Moreover, the tracking
error may be made as small as desired by increasing the tracking gain Kv.

Proof:
   Let the NN approximation property (8.2.15) hold for the function f(x)
given in (8.3.5) with a given accuracy N for all x in the compact set
                     with bx>qB. Let r(0)僆Sr. Then the approximation
property holds at time 0.
  Define the Lyapunov function candidate


                                                                              (3)


Differentiating yields

                                                                              (4)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
8.4 Tuning Algorithms for Linear-in-the-Parameters NN                       447

whence substitution from (8.4.2) yields


                                                                             (5)


Then, using tuning rule (2) yields

                                                                             (6)

Since




there results



                                                                             (7)

which is negative as long as the term in braces is positive. Completing the
square yields




which is guaranteed positive as long as


                                                                             (8)

or

                                                                             (9)

Thus, L is negative outside a compact set. Selecting the gain according to (1)
ensures that the compact set defined by ||r||br is contained in Sr, so that the
approximation property holds throughout. This demonstrates the UUB of
both ||r|| and ||W||F .                                                      䊏
   This proof is similar to [Narendra and Annaswamy 1987] but is modified
to reflect the fact that the NN approximates only on a compact set. In this
result one now requires the bound WB on the ideal weights W, which appears
in the PD gain condition (1). Now, bounds are discovered both for the


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
448                                         Neural Network Control of Robots

tracking error r(t) and the weights W(t). Note that no persistence of exictation
condition is needed to establish the bounds on W with the modified weight
tuning algorithm.
   The NN weight tuning algorithm (2) consists of a backpropagation through
time term plus a new second term. The importance of the , term, called the
e-modification, is that it adds a quadratric term in         in (7), so that it is
possible to establish that L is negative outside a compact set in the
              plane [Narendra and Annaswamy 1987]. The e-mod term
makes the tuning law robust to unmodelled dynamics so that the PE condition
is not needed. In [Polycarpou and Ioannou 1991] a projection algorithm is
used to keep the NN weights bounded. In [Chen and Khalil 1992], [Chen
and Liu 1994] a deadzone technique is employed.




Weight Initialization and On-Line Tuning. In the NN control schemes derived
in this paper there is no preliminary off-line learning phase. The weights are
simply initialized at zero, for then Figure 8.3.1 shows that the controller is
just a PD controller. Standard results in the robotics literature [Dawson et al.
1990] show that a PD controller gives bounded errors if Kv is large enough.
Therefore, the closed-loop system remains stable until the NN begins to learn.
The weights are tuned on-line in real-time as the system tracks the desired
trajectory. As the NN learns f(x), the tracking performance improves. This is
a significant improvement over other NN control techniques where one must
find some initial stabilizing weights, generally an impossible feat for complex
nonlinear systems.




Bounds on the Tracking Error and NN Weight Estimation Errors. The right-
hand side of (8) can be taken as a practical bound on the tracking error in
the sense that r(t) will never stray far above it. It is important to note from
this equation that the tracking error increases with the NN reconstruction
error N and robot disturbances dB, yet arbitrarily small tracking errors
may be achieved by selecting large gains Kv. This is in spite of Barron’s
lower bound on  .
   Note that the NN weights W are not guaranteed to approach the ideal
unknown weights W that give good approximation of f(x). However, this is of
no concern as long as W–W is bounded, as the proof guarantees. This
guarantees bounded control inputs so that the tracking objective can be
achieved.



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
8.5 Tuning Algorithms for Nonlinear-In-The-Parameters NN                      449


8.5 Tuning Algorithms for Nonlinear-in-the-Parameters NN

Now suppose that a 2-layer NN is used to approximate the robot function
according to (8.2.5) with || ||  on a compact set, and the ideal approximating
weights W, V constant. Then the control law (8.3.7) becomes

                                                                          (8.5.1)

The proposed NN control structure is shown in Figure 8.3.1.
    The NLIP NN controller is far more powerful than the 1-layer FLNN as it
is not necessary to select a basis of activation functions. In effect, the weights
V are adjusted on-line to automatically provide a suitable basis. The control
is nonlinear in the first-layer weights V, which presents complications in
deriving suitable weight tuning laws. Auxiliary signal v(t) is a function to be
detailed subsequently that provides robustness in the face of higher-order terms
in the Taylor series arising from the NLIP problem.
    Using the result (8.2.13) to properly address the NLIP problem, the closed-
loop error dynamics (8.3.8) can be written as

                                                                          (8.5.2)

where the disturbance terms are

                                                                          (8.5.3)

Define

                                                                          (8.5.4)


and Z, Z equivalently. It is not difficult to show that

                                                                          (8.5.5)

with Ci known positive constants.
  It is assumed that the ideal weights are bounded so that

                                                                          (8.5.6)

with ZB known. (Standard adaptive robust control techniques can be used to
lift the assumption that ZB is known [Polycarpou 1996].)
    The next theorem presents the most powerful NN controller in this
chapter.



Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
450                                       Neural Network Control of Robots

THEOREM 8.5–1: (Augmented Backprop Weight Tuning for Multi-layer NN
Controller).
   Let the desired trajectory qd(t) be bounded by qB and the initial tracking
error r(0) be in Sr. Let the ideal target NN weights be bounded by known ZB.
Take the control input for the robot dynamics (8.3.1) as (8.5.1) with PD gain
satisfying


                                                                          (1)


where C3 is defined in the proof. Let the robustifying term be

                                                                          (2)

with gain

                                                                          (3)

    Let NN weight tuning be provided by

                                                                          (4)


                                                                          (5)

with any constant matrices F=FT>0, G=GT>0, and >0 a small scalar design
parameter. Then the filtered tracking error r(t) and NN weight estimates V, W
are UUB, with the bounds given specifically by (10) and (11). Moreover, the
tracking error may be kept as small as desired by increasing the gains Kv in
(8.5.1).

Proof:
   Let the NN approximation property (8.2.5) hold for the function f(x) given
in (8.3.5) with a given accuracy ε N for all x in the compact set
                    with bx>qB. Let r(0)僆Sr. Then the approximation property
holds at time 0.
   Define the Lyapunov function candidate

                                                                          (6)

Differentiating yields

                                                                          (7)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
8.5 Tuning Algorithms for Nonlinear-In-The-Parameters NN                  451

Substituting now from the error system (8.5.2) yields




                                                                           (8)


The tuning rules give




Since



there results




where Kvmin is the minimum singular value of Kv, and the last inequality holds
due to (3).
  L is negative as long as the term in braces is positive. Defining C3=
ZB+C1/ and completing the square yields



                                                                           (9)

which is guaranteed positive as long as either


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
452                                          Neural Network Control of Robots


                                                                              (10)


or

                                                                              (11)

   Thus, L is negative outside a compact set. According to the LaSalle
extension [Lewis et al. 1993] this demonstrates the UUB of both ||r|| and ||Z||F
as long as the control remains valid within this set. However, the PD gain
condition (1) shows that the compact set defined by ||r||br is contained in Sr,
so that the approximation property holds throughout. 䊏
   The first terms in the tuning algorithms (4), (5) are nothing but back-
propagation of the tracking error through time. The last terms are the Narendra
e-mod, and the second term in (4) is a novel second-order term needed due to
the NLIP of the NN. The robustifying term v(t) is required also due to the
NLIP problem.
   The comments appearing after Theorem 8.4.1 are germane here.
Specifically, there is no preliminary off-line tuning phase and NN weight
tuning occurs on-line in real-time simultaneously with control action. Weight
initialization is not an issue in the proof and it is not necessary to provide
initial stabilizing weights; the weights are simply initialized so that the NN
output is equal to zero, for then the PD loop keeps the system stable until the
NN begins to learn. However, practical experiments [Gutierrez and Lewis
1998] show that it is important to initialize the weights suitably. A good
choice is to select V(0) randomly and W(0) equal to zero.
   In practice it is not necessary to compute the constants c0, c1, c2, C0, C1, C2,
ZB nor determine Sr. The size L of the NN and the PD gains Kv are simply
selected large and a simulation is performed. The simulation is then repeated
with a different L and Kv. Based on the difference in behavior between the two
simulations, L and Kv can be modified.

Straight Backpropagation Weight Tuning. The backprop algorithm (usually
in discrete-time form) has been proposed innumerable times in the literature
for closed-loop control. It can be shown that if the NN approximation error 
is zero, the disturbances are d(t) zero, and there are no higher-order terms in
the Taylor series (8.2.12), then the straight backprop algorithm




                                                                           (8.5.7)




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
8.5 Tuning Algorithms for Nonlinear-In-The-Parameters NN                                  453

may be used for closed-loop control instead of (4), (5). PE is required to show
that the NN weights are bounded using straight backprop. The conditions
mentioned are very restrictive and do not occur in practice; they essentially
require the robot arm to be linear (e.g. 1=link). Moreover, PE conditions are
not easy to guarantee in NN.

Passivity Properties of NN Controllers
The NN used in this paper are static feedforward nets, but since they appear
in a closed feedback loop and are tuned using differential equations, they are
dynamical systems. Therefore, one can discuss the passivity of these NN. In
general a NN cannot be guaranteed to be passive. However, the NN controllers
in this paper have some important passivity properties that result in robust
closed-loop performance.
   The system x=f (x, u),y=h(x, u) is said to be passive if it verifies an equality
of the so-called power form [Slotine and Li 1991]

                                                                                       (8.5.8)

for some lower-bounded L(t) and some g(t) 0. That is,

                                                                                       (8.5.9)

for all T 0 and some                      0. The system is dissipative if it is passive and in
addition


                                                                                     (8.5.10)

   A special sort of dissipativity occurs if g(t) is a quadratic function of ||x||
with bounded coefficients. We call this state strict passivity (SSP); then, the
norm of the internal states is bounded in terms of the power delivered to the
system. Somewhat surprisingly, the concept of SSP has not been extensively
used in the literature [Lewis et al. 1993], [Seron et al. 1994], though see
[Goodwin et al. 1984] where input and output strict pasivity are defined. SSP
turns out to be pivotal in studying the passivity properties of NN controllers,
and allows one to conclude some internal boundedness properties without
any assumptions of persistence of excitation.

Passivity of the Robot Tracking Error Dynamics
The error dynamics in this paper (e.g. (8.5.2)) appear in Figure 8.5.1 and
have the form
                                                                                     (8.5.11)


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
454                                               Neural Network Control of Robots




                 Figure 8.5.1: Two-layer neural net closed-loop error system.




where r(t) is the filtered tracking error and 0(t) is appropriately defined. This
system satisfies the following strong passivity property.

THEOREM 8.5–2: (SSP of Robot Error Dynamics).
The dynamics (8.5.11) from 0(t) to r(t) are a state strict passive system.
Proof:
  Take the nonnegative function




so that, using (8.5.11), one obtains




whence, the skew-symmetry property yields the power form




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
8.5 Tuning Algorithms for Nonlinear-In-The-Parameters NN                 455

   This is the power delivered to the system minus a quadratic term in ||r||,
verifying state strict passivity.                                       䊏


Passivity Properties of 2-layer NN Controllers
The closed-loop system is in Figure 8.3.1, where the NN appears in an inner
feedback linearization loop. The error dynamics for the 2-layer NN controller
are given by (8.5.2). The closed-loop error system appears in Figure 8.5.1,
with the signal 1 defined as

                                                                     (8.5.12)

Note the role of the NN in the error dynamics, where it is decomposed into
two effective blocks appearing in a typical feedback configuration.
  We now reveal the passivity properties engendered by straight back-
propagation tuning (8.5.7). To prove this algorithm, one uses the error
dynaqmics in a different form than (8.5.2), so that in Figure 8.5.1 one has
                .

THEOREM 8.5–3: (Passivity of Backprop NN Tuning Algorithm).
The simple backprop weight tuning algorithm (8.5.7) makes the map from
              , and the map from r(t)               , both passive maps.

Proof:
  The dynamics with respect W, V are

                                                                          (1)


                                                                          (2)

1. Selecting the nonnegative function



    and evaluating L along the trajectories of (1) yields



   which is in power form (8.5.8).
2. Selecting the nonnegative function




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
456                                         Neural Network Control of Robots

    and evaluating along the trajectories of (2) yields



    which is in power form.                                                   䊏

Thus, the robot error system in Figure 8.5.1 is state strict passive (SSP) and
the weight error blocks are passive; this guarantees the passivity of the closed-
loop system. Using the passivity theorem [Slotine and Li 1991] one may now
conclude that the input/output signals of each block are bounded as long as
the external inputs are bounded.
   Unfortunately, though passive, the closed-loop system cannot be guaranteed
to be SSP, so that when disturbances are nonzero, this does not yield boundedness
of the internal states of the weight blocks (i.e. W, V) unless those blocks are
observable, that is persistently exciting (PE).
   The next result shows why a PE condition is not needed with the modified
weight update algorithm given in Theorem 8.5.1.

THEOREM 8.5–4: (SSP of Augmented Backprop NN Tuning Algorithm).
The modified weight tuning algorithms in Theorem 8.5.1 make the map from
                             , and the map from                   , both
state strict passive (SSP) maps.

Proof:
   The dynamics relative to W, V using the tuning algorithms in Theorem
8.5.1 are given by




1. Selecting the nonnegative function




    and evaluating L yields




    Since


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
8.5 Tuning Algorithms for Nonlinear-In-The-Parameters NN                    457




    there results




   which is in power form with the last function quadratic in
2. Selecting the nonnegative function




    and evaluating L yields




    which is in power form with the last function quadratic in ||V||F .    䊏

The SSP of both the robot dynamics and the weight tuning blocks does guarantee
SSP of the closed-loop system, so that the norms of the internal states are
bounded in terms of the power delivered to each block. Then, boundedness of
input/output signals assures state boundedness without any sort of observability
or PE requirement.

Definition of Passive NN and Robust NN. We define a dynamically tuned
NN as passive if, in the error formulation, the tuning guarantees the passivity
of the weight tuning subsystems. Then, an extra PE condition is needed to
guarantee boundedness of the weights. This PE condition is generally in terms
of the outputs of the hidden layers of the NN. We define a dynamically tuned
NN as robust if, in the error formulation, the tuning guarantees the SSP of the
weight tuning subsystem. Then, no extra PE condition is needed for boundedness
of the weights. Note that (1) SSP of the open-loop plant error system is needed
in addition for tracking stability, and (2) the NN passivity properties are
dependent on the weight tuning algorithm used.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
458                                       Neural Network Control of Robots

Passivity Properties of 1-Layer NN Controllers
In a similar fashion, it is shown that the FLNN controller tuning algorithm
makes the system passive, so that an additional PE condition is needed to
verify internal stability of the NN weights. On the other hand, the augmented
tuning algorithm in Theorem 8.4.1 yields SSP, so that no PE is needed.


8.6        Summary
Neural network controller design algorithms were given for a general class of
industrial Lagrangian motion systems characterized by the rigid robot arms.
The design procedures are based on rigorous nonlinear derivations and stability
proofs, and yield a multiloop intelligent control structure with NN in some of
the loops. NN weight tuning algorithms were given that do not require
complicated initialization procedures or any off-line learning phase, work
on-line in real-time, and offer guaranteed tracking and bounded NN weights
and control signals. The NN controllers given here are model-free controllers
in that they work for any system in a prescribed class without the need for
extensive modeling and preliminary analysis to find a ‘regression matrix’.
Unlike standard robot adaptive controllers, they do not require linearity in
the parameters (see also [Colbaugh and Seraji 1994] which does not need
LIP). Proper design allows the NN controllers to avoid requirements such as
persistence of excitation and certainty equivalence. NN passivity and
robustness properties are defined and studied here.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES

[Åström and Wittenmark 1989] K.J.Åström and B.Wittenmark, Adaptive
    Control, Addision Wesley, Reading, MA, 1989.
[Barron 1993] Barren, A.R., “Universal approximation bounds for
    superpositions of a sigmoidal function,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol.
    39, no. 3, pp. 930–945, May 1993.
[Chen and Khalil 1992] F.-C.Chen and H.K.Khalil, “Adaptive control of
   nonlinear systems using neural networks,” Int. J. Control, vol. 55, no. 6,
   pp. 1299–1317, 1992.
[Chen and Liu 1994] F.-C.Chen and C.-C.Liu, “Adaptively controlling nonlinear
    continuous-time systems using multilayer neural networks,” IEEE Trans.
    Automat. Control, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1306–1310, June 1994.
[Colbaugh and Seraji 1994] R.Colbaugh, H.Seraji, and K.Glass, “A new class
    of adaptive controllers for robot trajectory tracking,” J. Robotic Systems,
    vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 761–772, 1994.
[Craig 1988] Craig, J.J., Adaptive Control of Mechanical Manipulators,
    Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1988.
[Dawson et al. 1990] Dawson, D.M., Z.Qu, F.L.Lewis, and J.F.Dorsey, “Robust
   control for the tracking of robot motion,” Int. J. Control, vol. 52, no. 3,
   pp. 581–595, 1990.
[Goodwin et al. 1984] Goodwin, C.G., and K.S.Sin, Adaptive Filtering,
   Prediction, and Control, Prentice-Hall, New Jersey, 1984.
[Gorinevsky 1995] D.Gorinevsky, “On the persistency of excitation in radial
   basis function network identificaiton of nonlinear systems,” IEEE Trans.
   Neural Networks, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 1237–1244, Sept. 1995.
[Gutierrez and Lewis 1998] L.B.Gutierrez and F.L.Lewis, “Implementation of
   a neural net tracking controller for a single flexible link: comparison


                                                                           459
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
460                                                            REFERENCES

      with PD and PID controllers,” IEEE Trans. Industrial Electronics, to
      appear, April 1998.
[Haykin 1994] S.Haykin, Neural Networks, IEEE Press, New York, 1994.
[Hornik and Stinchombe 1989] K.Hornik, M.Stinchombe, and H.White,
   “Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approximators,” Neural
   Networks, vol. 2, pp. 359–366, 1989.
[Ioannou and Kokotovic 1984] P.A.Ioannou and P.V.Kokotovic, “Instability
    analysis and improvement of robustness of adaptive control,” Automatica,
    vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 583–594, 1984.
[Kim and Lewis 1998] Y.H.Kim and F.L.Lewis, High-Level Feedback Control
    with Neural Networks, World Scientific, Singapore, 1998.
[Kreisselmeier and Anderson 1986] Kreisselmeier, G., and B.Anderson, “Robust
    model reference adaptive control,” IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, vol.
    AC-31, no. 2, pp. 127–133, Feb. 1986.
[Landau 1979] Y.D.Landau, Adaptive Control, Marcel Dekker, Basel, 1979.
[Lewis 1999] F.L.Lewis, “Nonlinear Network Structures for Feedback Control”,
    Asian Journal of Control, vol. 1, no. 4, pp.205–228, December 1999.
[Lewis et al. 1993] F.L.Lewis, C.T.Abdallah, and D.M.Dawson, Control of
    Robot Manipulators, New York: Macmillam, 1993.
[Lewis et al. 1999] F.L.Lewis, S.Jagannathan, and A.Yesildirek, Neural Network
    Control of Robot Manipulators and Nonlinear Systems, Taylor and
    Francis, London, 1999.
[Lewis and Kim 1998] F.L.Lewis and Y.H.Kim, “Neural Networks for Feedback
    Control,” Encyclopedia of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, ed.
    J.G.Webster, New York: Wiley, 1998. To appear.
[Lewis et al. 1993] Lewis, F.L., K.Liu, and A.Yesildirek, “Neural net robot
    controller with guaranteed tracking performance,” Proc. Int. Symp.
    Intelligent Control, pp. 225–231, Chicago., Aug. 1993.
[Lewis et al. 1995] Lewis, F.L., K.Liu, and A.Yesildirek, “Neural net robot
    controller with guaranteed tracking performance,” IEEE Trans. Neural
    Networks, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 703–715, 1995.
[Lewis et al. 1997] F.L.Lewis, K.Liu, and S.Commuri, “Neural networks and
    fuzzy logic systems for robot control,” in Fuzzy Logic and Neural Network
    Applications, ed. F.Wang, World Scientific Pub., to appear, 1997.
[Lewis et al. 1996] F.L.Lewis, A.Yesildirek, and K.Liu, “Multilayer neural
    net robot controller: structure and stability proofs,” IEEE Trans. Neural
    Networks, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1–12, Mar. 1996.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
REFERENCES                                                                  461

[Miller et al. 1991] W.T.Miller, R.S.Sutton, P.J.Werbos, ed., Neural Networks
    for Control, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1991.
[Narendra 1991] K.S.Narendra, “Adaptive Control Using Neural Networks,”
   Neural Networks for Control, pp 115–142. ed. W.T.Miller, R.S.Sutton,
   P.J.Werbos, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1991.
[Narendra and Annaswamy 1987] K.S.Narendra and A.M.Annaswamy, “A
   new adaptive law for robust adaptive control without persistent excitation,”
   IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, vol. 32, pp. 134–145, Feb., 1987.
[Narendra and Parthasarathy 1991] Narendra, K.S., and K. Parthasarathy,
   “Gradient methods for the optimization of dynamical systems containing
   neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Networks, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 252–
   262, Mar. 1991.
[Polycarpou 1996] M.M.Polycarpou, “Stable adaptive neural control scheme
    for nonlinear systems,” IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, vol. 41, no. 3,
    pp. 447–451, Mar. 1996.
[Polycarpou and Ioannou 1991] M.M.Polycarpou and P.A.Ioannou,
    “Identification and control using neural network models: design and
    stability analysis,” Tech. Report 91–09–01, Dept. Elect. Eng. Sys., Univ.
    S. Cal., Sept. 1991.
[Rovithakis and Christodoulou 1994] G.A.Rovithakis and M.A. Christodoulou,
    “Adaptive control of unknown plants using dynamical neural networks,”
    IEEE Trans. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 400–
    412, Mar. 1994.
[Sadegh 1993] N.Sadegh, “A perceptron network for functional identification
    and control of nonlinear systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Networks, vol.
    4, no. 6, pp. 982–988, Nov. 1993.
[Sanner and Slotine 1991] R.M.Sanner and J.-J.E.Slotine, “Stable adaptive
    control and recursive identification using radial gaussian networks,” Proc.
    IEEE Conf. Decision and Control, Brighton, 1991.
[Seron et al. 1994] Seron, M.M., D.J.Hill, and A.L.Fradkov, “Adaptive
    passification of nonlinear systems,” Proc. IEEE Conf. Decision and
    Control, pp. 190–195, Dec. 1994.
[Slotine 1988] Slotine, J.-J.E., “Putting physics in control the example of
    robotics,” IEEE Control Systems Magazine, pp. 12–17, Dec. 1988.
[Slotine and Li 1991] J.-J.Slotine and W.Li, Applied Nonlinear Control, Prentice
     Hall, New Jersey, 1991.
[Spong and Vidyasagar 1989] Spong, M.W., and M.Vidyasagar, Robot
    Dynamics and Control, New York: Wiley, 1989.


Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
462                                                          REFERENCES

[Wang 1997] L.-X.Wang, A course in fuzzy systems and control, Prentice-
   Hall, New Jersey, 1997.
[Werbos 1989] P.J.Werbos, “Back propagation: past and future,” Proc. 1988
   Int. Conf. Neural Nets, vol. 1, pp. I343-I353, 1989.
[Werbos 1992] P.J.Werbos, “Neurocontrol and supervised learning: an overview
   and evaluation,” in Handbook of Intelligent Control, ed. D.A. White and
   D.A.Sofge, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1992.
[White and Sofge 1992] D.A.White and D.A.Sofge, ed. Handbook of Intelligent
   Control, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1992.




Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.
